10.1006/jmps.1995.1020
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 39, 197-215 (1995) 

Intersensory Facilitation of Reaction Time: Evaluation of Counter and Diffusion Coactivation Models 

ADELE DIEDERICH 

Universitat Oldenburg 

interaction results in faster processing at some stages of In a simple reaction time experiment a subject's task is to react to processing, Le., reducing reaction time, or if It improves stimuli from three different modalities (visual, auditory, tactile) when perceptibility of stimuli, e.g. lowering of sensory thresholds. any ot ne Stimal presentes pone, * a pair trom two cifferent Early reaction time (RT) studies in this area were reaction time (RT) studies in this area were time (RT) studies in this area were (RT) studies in this area were studies in this area were in this area were this area were area were were time to doubleies, atimuliri comparedr to ‘action e em time to. single stimult or thei conducted by Dunlap & Wells (1910), who conducted by Dunlap & Wells (1910), who conducted Dunlap & Wells (1910), who conducted & Wells (1910), who conducted Wells (1910), who conducted (1910), who conducted who conducted conductedcted shorter reaction time to triple stimuli compared to reaction time to €Xperiments with reactions to visual and auditory stimuli. reactions to visual and auditory stimuli. visual and auditory stimuli. and auditory stimuli. auditory stimuli. stimuli. double and single stimuli is called “intersensory facilitation of reaction Todd (1912) may have been the first to call the phenomenon (1912) may have been the first to call the phenomenon may have been the first to call the phenomenon have been the first to call the phenomenon been the first to call the phenomenon the first to call the phenomenon first to call the phenomenon to call the phenomenon call the phenomenon the phenomenon phenomenon time.” Two models were considered to explain this phenomenon: of reducing reaction time “facilitation” when two or more reducing reaction time “facilitation” when two or more reaction time “facilitation” when two or more time “facilitation” when two or more “facilitation” when two or more when two or more two or more or more more a counter model (Poisson superposition) and a diffusion model stimuli are presented compared to the situation when only are presented compared to the situation when only presented compared to the situation when only compared to the situation when only to the situation when only the situation when only situation when only when only only the(Ornstein-Uhlenbeck level of mean reaction process}. times. Both© 1995 models Academic gave Press, an Inc. excellent fit on one‘‘ stimulus is present. Performing; is present. Performing; present. Performing; Performing;; an experiment where a experiment where a where a a 

Early reaction time (RT) studies in this area were reaction time (RT) studies in this area were time (RT) studies in this area were (RT) studies in this area were studies in this area were in this area were this area were area were were conducted by Dunlap & Wells (1910), who conducted by Dunlap & Wells (1910), who conducted Dunlap & Wells (1910), who conducted & Wells (1910), who conducted Wells (1910), who conducted (1910), who conducted who conducted conductedcted €Xperiments with reactions to visual and auditory stimuli. reactions to visual and auditory stimuli. visual and auditory stimuli. and auditory stimuli. auditory stimuli. stimuli. Todd (1912) may have been the first to call the phenomenon (1912) may have been the first to call the phenomenon may have been the first to call the phenomenon have been the first to call the phenomenon been the first to call the phenomenon the first to call the phenomenon first to call the phenomenon to call the phenomenon call the phenomenon the phenomenon phenomenon of reducing reaction time “facilitation” when two or more reducing reaction time “facilitation” when two or more reaction time “facilitation” when two or more time “facilitation” when two or more “facilitation” when two or more when two or more two or more or more more stimuli are presented compared to the situation when only are presented compared to the situation when only presented compared to the situation when only compared to the situation when only to the situation when only the situation when only situation when only when only only one‘‘ stimulus is present. Performing; is present. Performing; present. Performing; Performing;; an experiment where a experiment where a where a a light, a tone, and an electric shock were presented to the subject, he observed the following pattern of results which has been replicated many times (e.g., Bernstein, Clark, & Edelstein, 1969; Bernstein, Rose, & Ashe, 1970; Diederich, 1985, 1987; Diederich & Colonius, 1987; Gielen, Schmidt, & van den Heuvel, 1983; Hershenson, 1962; Miller, 1982; Morrell, 1967; Nickerson, 1973. All studies included only 1967; Nickerson, 1973. All studies included only Nickerson, 1973. All studies included only 1973. All studies included only All studies included only studies included only included only only two different stimuli: light and tone): RT to double stimuli different stimuli: light and tone): RT to double stimuli light and tone): RT to double stimuli and tone): RT to double stimuli tone): RT to double stimuli RT to double stimuli to double stimuli double stimuli stimuli is shorter than RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli shorter than RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli than RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli stimuli and RT to triple stimuli and RT to triple stimuli RT to triple stimuli to triple stimuli triple stimuli stimuli is shorter than RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for shorter than RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for than RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for stimuli. Todd’s explanation for Todd’s explanation for explanation for for these results is that “the more rapid responses to the that “the more rapid responses to the “the more rapid responses to the more rapid responses to the rapid responses to the responses to the to the the simultaneous stimuli than to the single stimuli have been stimuli than to the single stimuli have been than to the single stimuli have been to the single stimuli have been the single stimuli have been single stimuli have been stimuli have been have been been referred to in a previous division of this work as being due to in a previous division of this work as being due in a previous division of this work as being due a previous division of this work as being due previous division of this work as being due division of this work as being due of this work as being due this work as being due work as being due as being due being due due to a virtual increase in the extensity or intensity of the a virtual increase in the extensity or intensity of the virtual increase in the extensity or intensity of the increase in the extensity or intensity of the in the extensity or intensity of the the extensity or intensity of the extensity or intensity of the or intensity of the intensity of the of the the stimulus. ... The three simultaneous stimuli summate in The three simultaneous stimuli summate in three simultaneous stimuli summate in simultaneous stimuli summate in stimuli summate in summate in in excitatory effect and send their discharge down one common tract to the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). tract to the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). to the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). (Todd, 1912, p. 63). 1912, p. 63). p. 63). 63). To determine the amount of observable facilitation con- determine the amount of observable facilitation con- the amount of observable facilitation con- amount of observable facilitation con- of observable facilitation con- observable facilitation con- facilitation con- consider the following experimental design: In a simple reaction the following experimental design: In a simple reaction following experimental design: In a simple reaction experimental design: In a simple reaction design: In a simple reaction In a simple reaction a simple reaction simple reaction reaction experiment (Donders, 1868) the subject has to respond to 1868) the subject has to respond to the subject has to respond to subject has to respond to has to respond to to respond to respond to to stimuli such as tone, light, or tone and light presented such as tone, light, or tone and light presented as tone, light, or tone and light presented tone, light, or tone and light presented light, or tone and light presented or tone and light presented tone and light presented and light presented light presented presented together or with a short delay between light and tone. The or with a short delay between light and tone. The a short delay between light and tone. The short delay between light and tone. The delay between light and tone. The between light and tone. The light and tone. The and tone. The tone. The The subject’s only task is to press a button as soon as she notices only task is to press a button as soon as she notices task is to press a button as soon as she notices is to press a button as soon as she notices to press a button as soon as she notices press a button as soon as she notices a button as soon as she notices button as soon as she notices as soon as she notices soon as she notices as she notices she notices notices any stimulus. The time from the onset of the stimulus (when stimulus. The time from the onset of the stimulus (when The time from the onset of the stimulus (when time from the onset of the stimulus (when from the onset of the stimulus (when the onset of the stimulus (when onset of the stimulus (when of the stimulus (when the stimulus (when stimulus (when (when pesenting two stimuli from the onset of the first stimulus) to two stimuli from the onset of the first stimulus) to stimuli from the onset of the first stimulus) to from the onset of the first stimulus) to the onset of the first stimulus) to onset of the first stimulus) to of the first stimulus) to the first stimulus) to first stimulus) to stimulus) to to the response of the subject response of the subject of the subject the subject subject is defined as reaction time. defined as reaction time. as reaction time. reaction time. time. Typical results of this kind of experiment are as follows: results of this kind of experiment are as follows: of this kind of experiment are as follows: this kind of experiment are as follows: kind of experiment are as follows: of experiment are as follows: experiment are as follows: are as follows: as follows: follows: with moderate intensities the RT to tone is shorter, on moderate intensities the RT to tone is shorter, on intensities the RT to tone is shorter, on the RT to tone is shorter, on RT to tone is shorter, on to tone is shorter, on tone is shorter, on is shorter, on shorter, on on average, than the RT to light’; presenting light first and the than the RT to light’; presenting light first and the the RT to light’; presenting light first and the RT to light’; presenting light first and the to light’; presenting light first and the light’; presenting light first and the presenting light first and the light first and the first and the and the the 

1. INTRODUCTION: INTERSENSORY INTERACTION AND THE FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

Traditionally, perception and information processing Morrell, 1967; Nickerson, 1973. All studies included only 1967; Nickerson, 1973. All studies included only Nickerson, 1973. All studies included only 1973. All studies included only All studies included only studies included only included only only have been studied in one single sensory modality, isolated two different stimuli: light and tone): RT to double stimuli different stimuli: light and tone): RT to double stimuli light and tone): RT to double stimuli and tone): RT to double stimuli tone): RT to double stimuli RT to double stimuli to double stimuli double stimuli stimuli from all remaining modalities. For example, in determining is shorter than RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli shorter than RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli than RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli RT to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli to single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli single stimuli and RT to triple stimuli stimuli and RT to triple stimuli and RT to triple stimuli RT to triple stimuli to triple stimuli triple stimuli stimuli hearing thresholds the influence of other modalities such as is shorter than RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for shorter than RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for than RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for RT to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for to double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for double stimuli. Todd’s explanation for stimuli. Todd’s explanation for Todd’s explanation for explanation for for vision or feeling is to be eliminated as much as possible. these results is that “the more rapid responses to the that “the more rapid responses to the “the more rapid responses to the more rapid responses to the rapid responses to the responses to the to the the However, neuroanatomical and -physiological facts, psysimultaneous stimuli than to the single stimuli have been stimuli than to the single stimuli have been than to the single stimuli have been to the single stimuli have been the single stimuli have been single stimuli have been stimuli have been have been been chological data, and, not least, common experience suggest referred to in a previous division of this work as being due to in a previous division of this work as being due in a previous division of this work as being due a previous division of this work as being due previous division of this work as being due division of this work as being due of this work as being due this work as being due work as being due as being due being due due that there is a more-or-less strong interaction among the to a virtual increase in the extensity or intensity of the a virtual increase in the extensity or intensity of the virtual increase in the extensity or intensity of the increase in the extensity or intensity of the in the extensity or intensity of the the extensity or intensity of the extensity or intensity of the or intensity of the intensity of the of the the modalities. For example, sometimes we close our eyes stimulus. ... The three simultaneous stimuli summate in The three simultaneous stimuli summate in three simultaneous stimuli summate in simultaneous stimuli summate in stimuli summate in summate in in when listening to music so as not to be disturbed by visual excitatory effect and send their discharge down one influences. This interaction is sometimes called “intersencommon tract to the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). tract to the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). to the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). the reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). reaction finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). finger.” (Todd, 1912, p. 63). (Todd, 1912, p. 63). 1912, p. 63). p. 63). 63). sory interaction” (Welch & Warren, 1986) and different To determine the amount of observable facilitation con- determine the amount of observable facilitation con- the amount of observable facilitation con- amount of observable facilitation con- of observable facilitation con- observable facilitation con- facilitation con- convarieties of intersensory facilitation can be distinguished — sider the following experimental design: In a simple reaction the following experimental design: In a simple reaction following experimental design: In a simple reaction experimental design: In a simple reaction design: In a simple reaction In a simple reaction a simple reaction simple reaction reaction according its influence on perception. On the one hand, we experiment (Donders, 1868) the subject has to respond to 1868) the subject has to respond to the subject has to respond to subject has to respond to has to respond to to respond to respond to to can consider those intersensory interactions which cause an stimuli such as tone, light, or tone and light presented such as tone, light, or tone and light presented as tone, light, or tone and light presented tone, light, or tone and light presented light, or tone and light presented or tone and light presented tone and light presented and light presented light presented presented improvement or worsening of perception, ¢.g., increasing together or with a short delay between light and tone. The or with a short delay between light and tone. The a short delay between light and tone. The short delay between light and tone. The delay between light and tone. The between light and tone. The light and tone. The and tone. The tone. The The the threshold for visual or auditory stimuli, or faster subject’s only task is to press a button as soon as she notices only task is to press a button as soon as she notices task is to press a button as soon as she notices is to press a button as soon as she notices to press a button as soon as she notices press a button as soon as she notices a button as soon as she notices button as soon as she notices as soon as she notices soon as she notices as she notices she notices notices processing of a stimulus in a given sensory modality. Onthe any stimulus. The time from the onset of the stimulus (when stimulus. The time from the onset of the stimulus (when The time from the onset of the stimulus (when time from the onset of the stimulus (when from the onset of the stimulus (when the onset of the stimulus (when onset of the stimulus (when of the stimulus (when the stimulus (when stimulus (when (when other hand, we can study those intersensory interactions pesenting two stimuli from the onset of the first stimulus) to two stimuli from the onset of the first stimulus) to stimuli from the onset of the first stimulus) to from the onset of the first stimulus) to the onset of the first stimulus) to onset of the first stimulus) to of the first stimulus) to the first stimulus) to first stimulus) to stimulus) to to which cause a qualitative change in perception, eg. the response of the subject response of the subject of the subject the subject subject is defined as reaction time. defined as reaction time. as reaction time. reaction time. time. different perceptions of color when presenting high tones or Typical results of this kind of experiment are as follows: results of this kind of experiment are as follows: of this kind of experiment are as follows: this kind of experiment are as follows: kind of experiment are as follows: of experiment are as follows: experiment are as follows: are as follows: as follows: follows: low tones at the same time. Intersensory interaction is called with moderate intensities the RT to tone is shorter, on moderate intensities the RT to tone is shorter, on intensities the RT to tone is shorter, on the RT to tone is shorter, on RT to tone is shorter, on to tone is shorter, on tone is shorter, on is shorter, on shorter, on on “intersensory facilitation” or “facilitation,” for short, if the average, than the RT to light’; presenting light first and the than the RT to light’; presenting light first and the the RT to light’; presenting light first and the RT to light’; presenting light first and the to light’; presenting light first and the light’; presenting light first and the presenting light first and the light first and the first and the and the the 

Correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed to Adele Diederich, Institut fiir Kognitionsforschung, Universitat Oldenburg, P.O. Box 2503, D-26111 Oldenburg, Germany. E-mail: diederich@ psychologie.uni-oldenburg.de, 

'RT to sensory stimulation are reciprocally proportional to stimulus intensities up to an irreducible minimum (¢.g., Woodworth & Schlosberg, 1954). Moderate intensities mean that the sttmuli are well above perception threshold but not so intense that the RT is close to irreducible minimum. 

197 

0022-2496 /95 $6.00 Copyright © 1995 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 

198 

A. DIEDERICH 

. 

tone t ms later the RT is, on average, shorter than the RT 1982). Separate activation models assume that processing in Separate activation models assume that processing in activation models assume that processing in models assume that processing in assume that processing in that processing in processing in in to tone plus the t-ms delay. The decrease of RT when two — different sensory channels is in parallel. Presenting multiple or more stimuli are presented, compared to the RT when - stimuli (e.g., light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) stimuli (e.g., light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) (e.g., light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) tone, or light, tone, and vibration) or light, tone, and vibration) light, tone, and vibration) tone, and vibration) and vibration) vibration) only one stimulus is presented, is here called “intersensory produces separate activation in each sensory channel. In separate activation in each sensory channel. In activation in each sensory channel. In in each sensory channel. In each sensory channel. In sensory channel. In channel. In facilitation,” 1e., facilitation is defined with respect to RT to each channel activation builds to the level at which it can channel activation builds to the level at which it can activation builds to the level at which it can builds to the level at which it can to the level at which it can the level at which it can level at which it can at which it can which it can it can can single stimuli (reference point). Let RT, and RTy be the produce a response. The response is produced by the signal a response. The response is produced by the signal response. The response is produced by the signal The response is produced by the signal response is produced by the signal is produced by the signal produced by the signal by the signal the signal signal mean reaction time to auditory (A) and visual (V) stimuli, that is processed first. These models are also called “race is processed first. These models are also called “race processed first. These models are also called “race first. These models are also called “race These models are also called “race models are also called “race are also called “race also called “race called “race “race respectively, and RTy,(t) denotes the reaction time when models” since a race between several response activation since a race between several response activation a race between several response activation race between several response activation between several response activation several response activation response activation activation both signals are presented together, the auditory stimulus processes takes place and the winner determines the t ms after the visual stimulus. The observed amount of response time. Assuming processing time to be a random time. Assuming processing time to be a random Assuming processing time to be a random processing time to be a random time to be a random to be a random be a random a random random intersensory facilitation is found to be variable, separate activation models predict faster average separate activation models predict faster average activation models predict faster average models predict faster average predict faster average faster average average 

1982). Separate activation models assume that processing in Separate activation models assume that processing in activation models assume that processing in models assume that processing in assume that processing in that processing in processing in in when two — different sensory channels is in parallel. Presenting multiple two — different sensory channels is in parallel. Presenting multiple — different sensory channels is in parallel. Presenting multiple different sensory channels is in parallel. Presenting multiple sensory channels is in parallel. Presenting multiple channels is in parallel. Presenting multiple is in parallel. Presenting multiple in parallel. Presenting multiple parallel. Presenting multiple Presenting multiple multiple - stimuli (e.g., light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) stimuli (e.g., light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) (e.g., light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) light and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) and tone, or light, tone, and vibration) tone, or light, tone, and vibration) or light, tone, and vibration) light, tone, and vibration) tone, and vibration) and vibration) vibration) produces separate activation in each sensory channel. In separate activation in each sensory channel. In activation in each sensory channel. In in each sensory channel. In each sensory channel. In sensory channel. In channel. In each channel activation builds to the level at which it can channel activation builds to the level at which it can activation builds to the level at which it can builds to the level at which it can to the level at which it can the level at which it can level at which it can at which it can which it can it can can produce a response. The response is produced by the signal a response. The response is produced by the signal response. The response is produced by the signal The response is produced by the signal response is produced by the signal is produced by the signal produced by the signal by the signal the signal signal that is processed first. These models are also called “race is processed first. These models are also called “race processed first. These models are also called “race first. These models are also called “race These models are also called “race models are also called “race are also called “race also called “race called “race “race models” since a race between several response activation since a race between several response activation a race between several response activation race between several response activation between several response activation several response activation response activation activation processes takes place and the winner determines the response time. Assuming processing time to be a random time. Assuming processing time to be a random Assuming processing time to be a random processing time to be a random time to be a random to be a random be a random a random random variable, separate activation models predict faster average separate activation models predict faster average activation models predict faster average models predict faster average predict faster average faster average average reaction to multiple stimuli compared to single stimuli since the expected value of the minimum of the processing times in different channels is smaller than or; equala to the smaller expected value of the processing time in either channel (probability summation). Raab (1962) presented the first statistical model to explain the observed reaction time reduction. He assumed that processing time for visual and He assumed that processing time for visual and assumed that processing time for visual and that processing time for visual and processing time for visual and time for visual and for visual and visual and and auditory stimuli are independent normally distributed random variables with the same variance differing only in variables with the same variance differing only in with the same variance differing only in the same variance differing only in same variance differing only in variance differing only in differing only in only in in the means. In experiments, however, it has been found that means. In experiments, however, it has been found that In experiments, however, it has been found that experiments, however, it has been found that however, it has been found that it has been found that has been found that been found that found that that the amount of facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s amount of facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s of facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s is larger than predicted by Raab’s larger than predicted by Raab’s than predicted by Raab’s predicted by Raab’s by Raab’s Raab’s model. Gielen, Gielen, et al. (1983) modified Raab’s model by al. (1983) modified Raab’s model by (1983) modified Raab’s model by modified Raab’s model by Raab’s model by model by by making less strict assumptions about the distribution of the less strict assumptions about the distribution of the strict assumptions about the distribution of the assumptions about the distribution of the about the distribution of the the distribution of the distribution of the of the the processing time. But even then the model could not predict time. But even then the model could not predict But even then the model could not predict even then the model could not predict then the model could not predict the model could not predict model could not predict could not predict predict as much facilitation as observed in the data. Miller (1982) much facilitation as observed in the data. Miller (1982) facilitation as observed in the data. Miller (1982) as observed in the data. Miller (1982) observed in the data. Miller (1982) in the data. Miller (1982) the data. Miller (1982) data. Miller (1982) Miller (1982) (1982) proposed an inequality for testing statistical facilitation inequality for testing statistical facilitation for testing statistical facilitation testing statistical facilitation statistical facilitation facilitation models. The test is based on a prediction of the separate The test is based on a prediction of the separate test is based on a prediction of the separate is based on a prediction of the separate based on a prediction of the separate on a prediction of the separate a prediction of the separate prediction of the separate of the separate the separate separate activation assumption for RT distributions where the RT to assumption for RT distributions where the RT to for RT distributions where the RT to RT distributions where the RT to distributions where the RT to where the RT to the RT to RT to to a double stimulus, say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is double stimulus, say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is stimulus, say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is an auditory and a visual stimulus, is auditory and a visual stimulus, is and a visual stimulus, is a visual stimulus, is visual stimulus, is stimulus, is is the minimum of the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., minimum of the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., of the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., RT of the single stimuli, i.e., of the single stimuli, i.e., the single stimuli, i.e., single stimuli, i.e., stimuli, i.e., i.e., 

__ 

_ 

==> picture [148 x 52] <==

observed facilitationvee gs =<(— 

The difference in RT to light, tone, or tactile stimuli might reduction. He assumed that processing time for visual and He assumed that processing time for visual and assumed that processing time for visual and that processing time for visual and processing time for visual and time for visual and for visual and visual and and be due not only to different modality dependend intensities auditory stimuli are independent normally distributed (no cross modality matching is done in this kind of experirandom variables with the same variance differing only in variables with the same variance differing only in with the same variance differing only in the same variance differing only in same variance differing only in variance differing only in differing only in only in in ment) but also to different conduction times for the the means. In experiments, however, it has been found that means. In experiments, however, it has been found that In experiments, however, it has been found that experiments, however, it has been found that however, it has been found that it has been found that has been found that been found that found that that modalities. Hershenson (1962) argued that therefore interthe amount of facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s amount of facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s of facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s facilitation is larger than predicted by Raab’s is larger than predicted by Raab’s larger than predicted by Raab’s than predicted by Raab’s predicted by Raab’s by Raab’s Raab’s sensory facilitation occurs if neural events derived from the model. Gielen, Gielen, et al. (1983) modified Raab’s model by al. (1983) modified Raab’s model by (1983) modified Raab’s model by modified Raab’s model by Raab’s model by model by by visual and auditory stimuli were somewhere contemmaking less strict assumptions about the distribution of the less strict assumptions about the distribution of the strict assumptions about the distribution of the assumptions about the distribution of the about the distribution of the the distribution of the distribution of the of the the poraneous. He claimed that “facilitation should be expected _ processing time. But even then the model could not predict time. But even then the model could not predict But even then the model could not predict even then the model could not predict then the model could not predict the model could not predict model could not predict could not predict predict when the light and sound stimuli are offset in time by the as much facilitation as observed in the data. Miller (1982) much facilitation as observed in the data. Miller (1982) facilitation as observed in the data. Miller (1982) as observed in the data. Miller (1982) observed in the data. Miller (1982) in the data. Miller (1982) the data. Miller (1982) data. Miller (1982) Miller (1982) (1982) amount approximately equal to the difference between the proposed an inequality for testing statistical facilitation inequality for testing statistical facilitation for testing statistical facilitation testing statistical facilitation statistical facilitation facilitation RTs to the single stimuli. The RT to this presentation models. The test is based on a prediction of the separate The test is based on a prediction of the separate test is based on a prediction of the separate is based on a prediction of the separate based on a prediction of the separate on a prediction of the separate a prediction of the separate prediction of the separate of the separate the separate separate should be faster than to either stimulus alone and the maxiactivation assumption for RT distributions where the RT to assumption for RT distributions where the RT to for RT distributions where the RT to RT distributions where the RT to distributions where the RT to where the RT to the RT to RT to to mum effect should occur when 4? equals the difference a double stimulus, say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is double stimulus, say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is stimulus, say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is say an auditory and a visual stimulus, is an auditory and a visual stimulus, is auditory and a visual stimulus, is and a visual stimulus, is a visual stimulus, is visual stimulus, is stimulus, is is between the RTs to the stimuli when presented singly.” the minimum of the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., minimum of the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., of the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., the RT of the single stimuli, i.e., RT of the single stimuli, i.e., of the single stimuli, i.e., the single stimuli, i.e., single stimuli, i.e., stimuli, i.e., i.e., (Hershenson, 1962, p. 289.) That is, as Raab (1962) put it, “Physiological synchrony, rather than stimulus synchrony, RTy, =min(RT,, RT), (1) 

==> picture [179 x 13] <==

'S required. (Raab, 1962, p. 574.) a 

where RT, and RT, denote the reaction time random ‘able t ‘sual and an auditory stimulus. respectivel Varia Die 10 @ VISUAL ANC A BUCHOTY SURIENNS, TESP y and RT,, denotes the reaction time random variable when both signals are presented. Therefore 8 P : 

The primary purpose of this article is to present a new model of intersensory facilitation called the multichannel pene ; tae diffusion model. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. First we briefly review the earliest and simplest account of intersensory facilitation—the separate activation race models—and we summarize the basic evidence that rules out this class. Next we present two coactivation models of intersensory facilitation—the superposition counter model and the new multichannel diffusion model. fittingFinally, both these models two competing models to the results of are a comprehensive compared by experiment on intersensory facilitation. We conclude by pointing out some difficulties that these data pose for both coactivation models. 

==> picture [251 x 15] <==

As observed by Miller (1982) Eq. (2) is a prediction of genarate activation models; the inequality puts an upper found on the facilitation produced by double stimuli (cf. itColonius js shown 1990; that Ulrich for the& triple Giray, stimulus 1986). In Diederich case (e.g., auditory (1992b) (A), visual (V), and tactile (T)), race models predict upper hounds for the triple stimulus condition of the type 

==> picture [96 x 10] <==

2. MODELING INTERSENSORY FACILITATION 

==> picture [169 x 13] <==

Basically two different approaches have been suggested to explain the phenomenon of intersensory facilitation: separate activation models and coactivation models (Miller, 

which are sharper than the bound analogous to Eq. (2), 1e., 

==> picture [169 x 11] <==

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

199 

It is common pratice to divide observable reaction time into additive components, ie., RT =S+R, where Sisarandom variable denoting the stimulus processing time, and R, another random variable, denotes all remaining processing times like stimulus encoding, stimulus preparation, motor delay, etc. Under this decomposition the hypothesis stated in Eq. (1) can be specified as follows: 

plays an alerting role at many of the processing stages, so that the affected stages are terminated more quickly and the response comes earlier. 

Whereas these models are mainly descriptive we will discuss two mathematical models that try to explain intersensory facilitation in the following section: a counter model and a diffusion model. Both models are informationaccumulation models. These models assume that information about a presented signal accumulates steadily over time until some condition or criterion is satisfied, at which time a decision is made based on the information then available. It is assumed that the nervous system accumulates information about the stimulus all the time, the rate of accumulation being a monotonic function of signal intensity. Major distinctions among various types of information—accumulation models are whether they assume information is accumulated at discrete points in time or continuously over time and whether they assume increments of information are discrete or continuous. 

==> picture [145 x 12] <==

and 

==> picture [109 x 14] <==

Here, Sy and S, are the modality specific stimulus processing times and the residual component, R, is assumed to be invariant across stimulus conditions. Note that under these assumptions, whether or not Sand Rare independent, the distribution inequality (Eq. 2) continue to hold (cf. Ulrich & Giray, 1986; and Colonius, 1986, for further results). 

Diederich (1992a) reports experiments with stimuli from three different modalities, auditory, visual, and tactile. 2.1. The Superposition Model for Intersensery Facilitation Assuming R to be a constant these empirical results, however, indicate serious violations of the separate activaFirst, we consider counter models, models with discrete tion assumption. In light of earlier results (Diederich & increments of information accumulated continuously over Colonius, 1987), supported by recent results by Giray & time. Ulrich (1994), indicating facilitation effects in the motor Information about a signal is determined by the component, one might argue that the above assumptions on occurrence of events, whose only relevant property is their of events, whose only relevant property is their events, whose only relevant property is their whose only relevant property is their only relevant property is their relevant property is their property is their is their their the relation between S and R are too simplistic. This issue occurrence, but whose rate is affected by signal intensity. but whose rate is affected by signal intensity. whose rate is affected by signal intensity. rate is affected by signal intensity. is affected by signal intensity. affected by signal intensity. by signal intensity. signal intensity. intensity. will be taken up in the discussion at the end of the paper. Since only the number of events N(¢) that have occurred by only the number of events N(¢) that have occurred by the number of events N(¢) that have occurred by number of events N(¢) that have occurred by of events N(¢) that have occurred by N(¢) that have occurred by that have occurred by have occurred by occurred by by Coactivation models are an alternative to separate time ¢ is relevant as information about a stimulus, these ¢ is relevant as information about a stimulus, these is relevant as information about a stimulus, these relevant as information about a stimulus, these information about a stimulus, these about a stimulus, these a stimulus, these stimulus, these activation models to explain intersensory facilitation. models are called counter models. Counter models have are called counter models. Counter models have called counter models. Counter models have counter models. Counter models have Counter models have models have have They assume that interaction between different sensory been used primarily in two-alternative choice reaction time used primarily in two-alternative choice reaction time primarily in two-alternative choice reaction time in two-alternative choice reaction time two-alternative choice reaction time choice reaction time reaction time time modalities is possible. When presenting multiple stimuli tasks (see, e.g., Audley & Pike (1965), Green & Luce Audley & Pike (1965), Green & Luce & Pike (1965), Green & Luce Pike (1965), Green & Luce (1965), Green & Luce Green & Luce & Luce Luce activation of different channels can be combined to satisfy a (1973, 1974), McGill (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more 1974), McGill (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more McGill (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more 1967), Luce (1986) for more Luce (1986) for more (1986) for more for more more single criterion for response initiation. Coactivation models background, Luce & Green Luce & Green & Green Green (1972), Pike (1966, 1968, predict faster average reaction time to multiple strmulicom1971, 1973), Townsend and Ashby (1983) for a detailed Townsend and Ashby (1983) for a detailed and Ashby (1983) for a detailed Ashby (1983) for a detailed (1983) for a detailed for a detailed a detailed detailed pared to single stimuli because the combined activation description). These models models assume the existence of a reaches this criterion faster. An early model belonging to separate internal counter for each alternative. When a counter for each alternative. When a for each alternative. When a each alternative. When a alternative. When a When a a this class of models is the so-called energy summation — stimulus is presented the subject is assumed to accumulate model. When presenting multiple stimuli, energy from these information about a stimulus over time. The counter which about a stimulus over time. The counter which a stimulus over time. The counter which over time. The counter which time. The counter which The counter which counter which which different sensory modalities is assumed to combine or to first reaches a preset criterion initiates the response in favor reaches a preset criterion initiates the response in favor preset criterion initiates the response in favor criterion initiates the response in favor initiates the response in favor the response in favor response in favor in favor favor summate in some peripheral stages of processing. This leads of that particular stimulus. Thus, under this assumption that particular stimulus. Thus, under this assumption stimulus. Thus, under this assumption Thus, under this assumption under this assumption this assumption assumption to an earlier termination of the processing in these stages counter models belong to the class of race models, since a models belong to the class of race models, since a belong to the class of race models, since a to the class of race models, since a the class of race models, since a class of race models, since a of race models, since a race models, since a models, since a since a a and therefore to shorter RT. Bernstein and his collaborators race between counters takes place and the winner deter- between counters takes place and the winner deter- counters takes place and the winner deter- takes place and the winner deter- place and the winner deter- and the winner deter- the winner deter- winner deter- deter(Bernstein, 1970; Bernstein et ai, 1970) worked out an mines the response. But, as mentioned in the preceding sec- the response. But, as mentioned in the preceding sec- response. But, as mentioned in the preceding sec- as mentioned in the preceding sec- mentioned in the preceding sec- in the preceding sec- the preceding sec- preceding sec- sec“energy integration model.” The model hypothesizes that tion, all race models can be excluded to explain intersensory all race models can be excluded to explain intersensory race models can be excluded to explain intersensory models can be excluded to explain intersensory can be excluded to explain intersensory excluded to explain intersensory to explain intersensory explain intersensory the intensities to visual and auditory stimuli integrate at facilitation observed in our data. Thus, we assume that the observed in our data. Thus, we assume that the in our data. Thus, we assume that the our data. Thus, we assume that the data. Thus, we assume that the Thus, we assume that the we assume that the assume that the that the the some common point in the nervous system. Presenting two counters combine somewhere to reach the preset criterion combine somewhere to reach the preset criterion somewhere to reach the preset criterion to reach the preset criterion reach the preset criterion the preset criterion preset criterion criterion different stimuli is the same as increasing the intensity earlier. Schwarz (1989) proposed a Poisson superposition Schwarz (1989) proposed a Poisson superposition (1989) proposed a Poisson superposition proposed a Poisson superposition a Poisson superposition Poisson superposition superposition of either stimulus. An alternative approach to energy model for two processes. In the following this approach is for two processes. In the following this approach is two processes. In the following this approach is processes. In the following this approach is In the following this approach is the following this approach is following this approach is this approach is approach is is summation models is the preparation-enhancement model extended to the three modality paradigm. to the three modality paradigm. the three modality paradigm. three modality paradigm. modality paradigm. paradigm. proposed by Nickerson (1973) and Bernstein, Chu, Briggs, We assume with Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of assume with Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of with Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of (1989) that the presentation of that the presentation of the presentation of presentation of & Schurman (1973). This model assumes that one stimulus a stimulus induces a neural renewal counting process, Le., induces a neural renewal counting process, Le., a neural renewal counting process, Le., neural renewal counting process, Le., renewal counting process, Le., process, Le., Le., 

Information about a signal is determined by the occurrence of events, whose only relevant property is their of events, whose only relevant property is their events, whose only relevant property is their whose only relevant property is their only relevant property is their relevant property is their property is their is their their occurrence, but whose rate is affected by signal intensity. but whose rate is affected by signal intensity. whose rate is affected by signal intensity. rate is affected by signal intensity. is affected by signal intensity. affected by signal intensity. by signal intensity. signal intensity. intensity. Since only the number of events N(¢) that have occurred by only the number of events N(¢) that have occurred by the number of events N(¢) that have occurred by number of events N(¢) that have occurred by of events N(¢) that have occurred by N(¢) that have occurred by that have occurred by have occurred by occurred by by time ¢ is relevant as information about a stimulus, these ¢ is relevant as information about a stimulus, these is relevant as information about a stimulus, these relevant as information about a stimulus, these information about a stimulus, these about a stimulus, these a stimulus, these stimulus, these models are called counter models. Counter models have are called counter models. Counter models have called counter models. Counter models have counter models. Counter models have Counter models have models have have been used primarily in two-alternative choice reaction time used primarily in two-alternative choice reaction time primarily in two-alternative choice reaction time in two-alternative choice reaction time two-alternative choice reaction time choice reaction time reaction time time tasks (see, e.g., Audley & Pike (1965), Green & Luce Audley & Pike (1965), Green & Luce & Pike (1965), Green & Luce Pike (1965), Green & Luce (1965), Green & Luce Green & Luce & Luce Luce (1973, 1974), McGill (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more 1974), McGill (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more McGill (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more (1963, 1967), Luce (1986) for more 1967), Luce (1986) for more Luce (1986) for more (1986) for more for more more background, Luce & Green Luce & Green & Green Green (1972), Pike (1966, 1968, 1971, 1973), Townsend and Ashby (1983) for a detailed Townsend and Ashby (1983) for a detailed and Ashby (1983) for a detailed Ashby (1983) for a detailed (1983) for a detailed for a detailed a detailed detailed description). These models models assume the existence of a separate internal counter for each alternative. When a counter for each alternative. When a for each alternative. When a each alternative. When a alternative. When a When a a — stimulus is presented the subject is assumed to accumulate stimulus is presented the subject is assumed to accumulate is presented the subject is assumed to accumulate presented the subject is assumed to accumulate the subject is assumed to accumulate is assumed to accumulate assumed to accumulate to accumulate accumulate information about a stimulus over time. The counter which about a stimulus over time. The counter which a stimulus over time. The counter which over time. The counter which time. The counter which The counter which counter which which first reaches a preset criterion initiates the response in favor reaches a preset criterion initiates the response in favor preset criterion initiates the response in favor criterion initiates the response in favor initiates the response in favor the response in favor response in favor in favor favor of that particular stimulus. Thus, under this assumption that particular stimulus. Thus, under this assumption stimulus. Thus, under this assumption Thus, under this assumption under this assumption this assumption assumption counter models belong to the class of race models, since a models belong to the class of race models, since a belong to the class of race models, since a to the class of race models, since a the class of race models, since a class of race models, since a of race models, since a race models, since a models, since a since a a race between counters takes place and the winner deter- between counters takes place and the winner deter- counters takes place and the winner deter- takes place and the winner deter- place and the winner deter- and the winner deter- the winner deter- winner deter- determines the response. But, as mentioned in the preceding sec- the response. But, as mentioned in the preceding sec- response. But, as mentioned in the preceding sec- as mentioned in the preceding sec- mentioned in the preceding sec- in the preceding sec- the preceding sec- preceding sec- section, all race models can be excluded to explain intersensory all race models can be excluded to explain intersensory race models can be excluded to explain intersensory models can be excluded to explain intersensory can be excluded to explain intersensory excluded to explain intersensory to explain intersensory explain intersensory facilitation observed in our data. Thus, we assume that the observed in our data. Thus, we assume that the in our data. Thus, we assume that the our data. Thus, we assume that the data. Thus, we assume that the Thus, we assume that the we assume that the assume that the that the the counters combine somewhere to reach the preset criterion combine somewhere to reach the preset criterion somewhere to reach the preset criterion to reach the preset criterion reach the preset criterion the preset criterion preset criterion criterion earlier. Schwarz (1989) proposed a Poisson superposition Schwarz (1989) proposed a Poisson superposition (1989) proposed a Poisson superposition proposed a Poisson superposition a Poisson superposition Poisson superposition superposition model for two processes. In the following this approach is for two processes. In the following this approach is two processes. In the following this approach is processes. In the following this approach is In the following this approach is the following this approach is following this approach is this approach is approach is is extended to the three modality paradigm. to the three modality paradigm. the three modality paradigm. three modality paradigm. modality paradigm. paradigm. 

We assume with Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of assume with Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of with Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of Schwarz (1989) that the presentation of (1989) that the presentation of that the presentation of the presentation of presentation of a stimulus induces a neural renewal counting process, Le., induces a neural renewal counting process, Le., a neural renewal counting process, Le., neural renewal counting process, Le., renewal counting process, Le., process, Le., Le., 

200 

A. DIEDERICH 

N={N(t),t20}, starting at t=0.? A response will be executed as soon as a Criterion ¢ has been reached, i.e., as soon as c counts have been registered. Presenting a tactile stimulus, light, or tone induces an independent renewal counting1>0}, Ny={Ny(t),t20},process for each andmodality, N;={N;(t),ie, N,z={Na(t),x for the auditory, visual, and tactile stimuli, respectively. For the double-signal trials as well as for the triple signal trials, we define two new stochastic PROCESSES by N2=Na + Ny and N3=Na+ Nyt Nr, respectively. 

The processes Nz= (Nott ) t20} and N;={N;(?), t>0} are called the superposition of the processes NVA and Ny, and of Nar Ny, and Nr, respectively, Let S;, i2 I, denote the waiting time for the ith renewal, then it is obvious that a fixed number of counts c will, on average, be collected earlier in the superposition process N,(t) than in anyrunning single process. Evidently, the more processes that are number in of parallel, counts, is the reached. sooner a preset criterion, ic., certain The theoretical count number c, or simply the criterion c, is assumed to be established by the subject for the number of units of information required for a response to be initiated. The criterion c can be influenced by experimental conditions; e.g., requiring high accuracy (no anticipation) might raise the criterion, whereas requiring high speed of responses might lower the criterion. The criterion 1s assumed to be a constant, however, over a given condition. For a discussion of all influencing variables for the criterion see Luce (1986). 

2.1.1. Mathematical Derivations for the Superposition Model 

The distribution function of the waiting time S, for the cth count in the superposition of different processes can be expressed in terms of the waiting time distribution of each participating process. Let P(S, <t|k),k =A, V, T, VA, TA, TV, TVA, be the distribution function of S, under the auditory single-signal trials, the visual single-signal trials, the tactile single-signal trials, the double-signal trials, and the triple-signal trials, respectively. With P(S.<1)=P(N(t)>c) (see, e.g., Cinlar, 1975, p. 54) we get P(S. <1| TVA) in terms of P(S.<t|A), P(S,<t|V), and P(S,<t|T) as follows (for derivation see Appendix): 

==> picture [80 x 20] <==

==> picture [112 x 80] <==

? nosmosne This implies N(0) = 0. Strictly speaking this assumes that peripherical 

processing of the stimulus is concurrent with stimulus presentation. 

==> picture [210 x 86] <==

In this way any distribution function for double or triple stimuli can be expressed in terms of the corresponding distribution functions of the single-signal trials. In our experiment the stimuli in the triple-signal trials were always presented in the order s;—sy—s, (denoting the tactile, visual, and auditory stimulus, respectively), since subjects tend to react fastest to tones and slowest to tactile stimuli. Letting 7, represent the time (in ms) between the presentation ofs and sy and t, the time between s_ and s, we get | process with counting function T A 

==> picture [222 x 38] <==

pore Nz(s)=Ny(s)=Na(s)=0, for s<0. Figure | ittustrates the superposition model for this situation. 

{py order to test the superposition model against empirical gata’ the interarrival time distribution must be specified. ay,ough the above derivations hold for arbitrary interarrival time distributions, the simplest case is to assume exponentially distributed interarrival times yielding a Poisson counting process. It is adopted here as a starting point. With 

==> picture [208 x 62] <==

==> picture [27 x 15] <==

==> picture [252 x 147] <==

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

201 

==> picture [213 x 95] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Ny
took
, ' ' ' i Ny
PoE
' 1 rey ryt ri, ’
ee Nr
_—— 13k 4 ’ Nr+Nv +N
0 7 72
----- End of picture text -----

The corresponding expected value £,, ,,[.S,] is (for derivation see Appendix) 

==> picture [234 x 144] <==

FIG. 1. The temporal course of {exemplary) events of the counting process N,(t) corresponding to Eq. (4). 

where «,, &%,, and a, denote the intensity parameter of the auditory, visual, and tactile channel, respectively. Note that _ for t,= 00, the distribution«cerita ti function reduces to the case when only two stimuli are presented. Setting t; =t,= ©, the distribution function reduces to the case when only one stimulus is presented. Obviously the larger the criticalcount numer C, ne smaller the Prepay that the waiting time until the cth count occurs before time 1. 

Setting t,=1,=0 leads to a superposition model where 44) stimuli are presented at the same time. With «=a,+ ay +4,, E[S,]=c/x becomes the means of a gamma distribution with parameters c and «. From here it is easy to see that increasing c increases the mean response time; increasing « decreases the mean response time. The equation for the expected value for the situation when only two stimuli are presented can be found in Schwarz (1989), and the equation for the variance for two presented stimuli the equation for the variance for two presented stimuli equation for the variance for two presented stimuli for the variance for two presented stimuli the variance for two presented stimuli variance for two presented stimuli for two presented stimuli two presented stimuli presented stimuli stimuli be found in Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance found in Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance in Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance & Colonius (1991). The variance Colonius (1991). The variance (1991). The variance The variance variance for the triple stimulus condition is the triple stimulus condition is triple stimulus condition is stimulus condition is condition is is 

2.1.2. Expected Value and Variance of the Reaction Timefor the Superposition Model 

The observed reactiona time is, assumed to be additively. and the equation for the variance for two presented stimuli the equation for the variance for two presented stimuli equation for the variance for two presented stimuli for the variance for two presented stimuli the variance for two presented stimuli variance for two presented stimuli for two presented stimuli two presented stimuli presented stimuli stimuli composed of the waiting time S, plus all processes following — can be found in Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance found in Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance in Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance Diederich & Colonius (1991). The variance & Colonius (1991). The variance Colonius (1991). The variance (1991). The variance The variance variance (or preceding) it. The durations of these additional profor the triple stimulus condition is the triple stimulus condition is triple stimulus condition is stimulus condition is condition is is cesses, which may include motor preparation and response executionvariable, R, say.components, In general,are S, andrepresented R need not by bea stochasti- random Varl[S.] =S.1= ET S27FL 5-]— —ETS..72ELS)’, (12)12 cally independent, and for a test of the model at the levelof where the entire distribution functions, the bivariate distribution for (S., R) has to be specified. However, at the level of 5, (c+) °) [apt (e-J) expectations, we have ELS.] = a2 —2 (expt aT} Xu j! 

==> picture [185 x 24] <==

==> picture [244 x 248] <==

==> picture [207 x 27] <==

Ifthe S, observable and R are RT stochastically at interstimulus independent, intervals (ISIs) the variance of t, and of tz ms willil! be 

==> picture [193 x 20] <==

For the sake of parsimony, in the application below we assume E(R) and Var(R) to be constant within an experimental condition, ie., E(R)=r and Var(R)=o%. Equations (7) and (8) then simplify respectively to 

==> picture [168 x 11] <==

==> picture [16 x 31] <==

==> picture [182 x 12] <==

(For derivation see Appendix.) 

202 

A. DIEDERICH 

2.2. The Multichannel Diffusion Model for Intersensory Facilitation 

==> picture [163 x 83] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
A(t) Criterion
|
Lt
0 1 r
----- End of picture text -----

The counter model and, consequently, the superposition model are stochastic processes with continuous-time and discrete-state space. Considering a discrete-time process with continuous-state space leads to a class of models, so 0 1 called general random walk models, that have functioned FIG. 2. A 2. A A stochastic trajectory primarily as an alternative to counter models in choice tasks accumulation process when three process when three when three three different stimuli are presented, 7, and and choice reaction time (see, e.g., Ashby, 1983; Edwards, — :, ms apart. 1965; Heath, 1981; Laming, 1968; Link & Heath, 1975; Stone, 1960). For a detailed description of various types of random walk models for two-choice discrimination and % Teflects the force directed Teflects the force directed the force directed force directed directed towards the criterion, whereas f response time data, see Townsend & Ashby (1983) and Luce reflects a restoring force directed a restoring force directed restoring force directed force directed directed towards the origin, Le., the (1986). (Note that in mathematical literature random walk ‘mitial level. —fx is of a level. —fx is of a —fx is of a is of a of a magnitude proportional to the models often exclusively refer to stochastic processes with ‘stance to the origin, i.e., f to the origin, i.e., f the origin, i.e., f origin, i.e., f i.e., f f represents the rate of growth discrete-time and discrete-state space). Recently developed towards an equilibrium when an equilibrium when equilibrium when when a signal is presented (x > 0), alternatives to these models are diffusion models, stochastic 24 it reflects the rate of decay it reflects the rate of decay reflects the rate of decay the rate of decay rate of decay of decay decay towards the initial level when processes with continuous-time and continuous-state space. the signal is switched off («=0). signal is switched off («=0). is switched off («=0). switched off («=0). off («=0). («=0). Note that random walk Most research done on these models is also for choice Models as referred to in as referred to in referred to in to in in mathematical literature are special reaction time. Ratcliff (1978) used a diffusion process CaS¢S of this typeof model, of this typeof model, this typeof model, typeof model,of model, model, i.¢.,the decay parameter fi is in his theory of memory retrieval. Recently, Busemeyer, 2°°- While the diffusion the diffusion diffusion coefficient is independent of the Townsend, and colleagues (Busemeyer & Townsend, 1992: state of information of information accumulation, the drift rate changes Busemeyer & Goldstein, 1992; Busemeyer & Townsend, with the location x. In our the location x. In our x. In our In our our experiment three different stimuli 1993) developed a dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms developed a dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms a dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms decision WF presented, t, and t, ms WF presented, t, and t, ms presented, t, and t, ms t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information presented, t, and t, ms t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information t, ms ms apart and the information ms apart and the information apart and the information and the information the information information making—decision field theory—which can be described by accumulation process for this process for this for this this situation can be illustrated as a diffusion process. Diffusion models also, though to a far 1 Fig. 2. Fig. 2. 2. less extent, entered simple reaction time research. Pacut _ The information accumulation information accumulation accumulation process starts at time t=0 (1980, 1982) applied a diffusion model to escape reaction with drift #, say, and diffusion drift #, say, and diffusion #, say, and diffusion say, and diffusion and diffusion diffusion coefficient o”. At time t= 7), and escape learning data; Pacut & Tych (1982) applied it to when the second stimulus is the second stimulus is second stimulus is stimulus is is presented, the process is located avoidance reaction latency and avoidance learning, Somewhere between between the Recently Smith (1990) proposed a diffusion model applied absorbing boundary. The drift boundary. The drift The drift drift coefficient now changes since to simple reaction time. In the following section we develop Ore information information is available; available; a diffusion model called a “multichannel diffusion model” become (a7 +y) — px > With (a7 +y) — px > With +y) — px > With — px > With > With With ay >a. Finally, at time for intersensory facilitation. t=t,, when the third stimulus when the third stimulus the third stimulus third stimulus stimulus is presented, the process is Assume that as soon asa signal is presented to the subject located somewhere between the somewhere between the between the the reflecting boundary and the the nervous system stochastically accumulates very small 2b6sorbing boundary.” The drift boundary.” The drift The drift drift coefficient now is (x)= amounts of activation continuously over time. Activation A (%r + %v +%,) — Bx, with %v +%,) — Bx, with +%,) — Bx, with — Bx, with Bx, with with > ay. In analogy to the supergrows nonlinearly towards an asymptote. After the signal is PoSition model call the switched off, the amount of activation is assumed to decay represent the force directed toward the absorbing boundary to its starting level. This decay, which has been postulated _(Titerion) “intensity parameters.” “intensity parameters.” parameters.” For simplicity the diffuin studies of neuronal activity dynamics (Ricciardi, 1977; 8100 coefficient is assumed to be coefficient is assumed to be is assumed to be assumed to be to be be the same during any fixed Tuckwell, 1989), can be accounted for neither in the counter stimulus period (0— T), (t, period (0— T), (t, (0— T), (t, T), (t, (t, —T), (t2— 0). Note that the model nor in those random walk models developed in psydiffusion process is thus process is thus is thus thus time-homogeneous within each chology. Further, it is assumed that activation never drops me interval interval [0,7,), [t1,72), and below its initial level. That is, the process is reflected on the homogeneous across the interval across the interval the interval interval [0, 00). lower boundary. Finally, a response is initiated as soon as a Analogous to the counter to the counter the counter counter model, the larger the criterion preset criterion level is reached. That is, the process is © assumed to be established by assumed to be established by to be established by be established by established by by the subject, the larger is absorbed on the upper boundary. This process can be ‘he numberof steps, given a numberof steps, given aof steps, given a steps, given a given a a fixed step size, to reach the described by a diffusion process called the “Ornsteinboundary; ie, ie, it takes more takes more more time until a response Uhlenbeck process” with one reflecting and one absorbing initiated. boundary (see, e.g., Cox & Miller, 1965; Karlin & Taylor, 1981). Its drift, (x), is a— Bx and its diffusion coefficient, >This may be the typical case, but may be the typical case, but be the typical case, but the typical case, but typical case, but case, but but the model also allows for the o*(x), is o*, where # and o are arbitrary positive constants. _ possibility of absorption before r, or rp. 

FIG. 2. A 2. A A stochastic trajectory representing the information accumulation process when three process when three when three three different stimuli are presented, 7, and 

. 

% Teflects the force directed Teflects the force directed the force directed force directed directed towards the criterion, whereas f reflects a restoring force directed a restoring force directed restoring force directed force directed directed towards the origin, Le., the ‘mitial level. —fx is of a level. —fx is of a —fx is of a is of a of a magnitude proportional to the ‘stance to the origin, i.e., f to the origin, i.e., f the origin, i.e., f origin, i.e., f i.e., f f represents the rate of growth towards an equilibrium when an equilibrium when equilibrium when when a signal is presented (x > 0), 24 it reflects the rate of decay it reflects the rate of decay reflects the rate of decay the rate of decay rate of decay of decay decay towards the initial level when the signal is switched off («=0). signal is switched off («=0). is switched off («=0). switched off («=0). off («=0). («=0). Note that random walk Models as referred to in as referred to in referred to in to in in mathematical literature are special CaS¢S of this typeof model, of this typeof model, this typeof model, typeof model,of model, model, i.¢.,the decay parameter fi is 2°°- While the diffusion the diffusion diffusion coefficient is independent of the state of information of information accumulation, the drift rate changes with the location x. In our the location x. In our x. In our In our our experiment three different stimuli WF presented, t, and t, ms presented, t, and t, ms t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information presented, t, and t, ms t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information t, ms ms apart and the information ms apart and the information apart and the information and the information the information information accumulation process for this process for this for this this situation can be illustrated as 1 Fig. 2. Fig. 2. 2. 

1993) developed a dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms developed a dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms a dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms dynamic stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms stochastic model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms model of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms of decision WF presented, t, and t, ms decision WF presented, t, and t, ms WF presented, t, and t, ms presented, t, and t, ms t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information presented, t, and t, ms t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information t, and t, ms and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information and t, ms t, ms ms apart and the information t, ms ms apart and the information ms apart and the information apart and the information and the information the information information 

_ The information accumulation information accumulation accumulation process starts at time t=0 with drift #, say, and diffusion drift #, say, and diffusion #, say, and diffusion say, and diffusion and diffusion diffusion coefficient o”. At time t= 7), when the second stimulus is the second stimulus is second stimulus is stimulus is is presented, the process is located Somewhere between between the reflecting boundary and the absorbing boundary. The drift boundary. The drift The drift drift coefficient now changes since Ore information information is available; available; ie., u(x) is assumed to become (a7 +y) — px > With (a7 +y) — px > With +y) — px > With — px > With > With With ay >a. Finally, at time t=t,, when the third stimulus when the third stimulus the third stimulus third stimulus stimulus is presented, the process is located somewhere between the somewhere between the between the the reflecting boundary and the 2b6sorbing boundary.” The drift boundary.” The drift The drift drift coefficient now is (x)= (%r + %v +%,) — Bx, with %v +%,) — Bx, with +%,) — Bx, with — Bx, with Bx, with with > ay. In analogy to the superPoSition model call the parameters a7,ay,%,, that represent the force directed toward the absorbing boundary _(Titerion) “intensity parameters.” “intensity parameters.” parameters.” For simplicity the diffu8100 coefficient is assumed to be coefficient is assumed to be is assumed to be assumed to be to be be the same during any fixed stimulus period (0— T), (t, period (0— T), (t, (0— T), (t, T), (t, (t, —T), (t2— 0). Note that the diffusion process is thus process is thus is thus thus time-homogeneous within each me interval interval [0,7,), [t1,72), and [t2, 00) but nonhomogeneous across the interval across the interval the interval interval [0, 00). , Analogous to the counter to the counter the counter counter model, the larger the criterion © assumed to be established by assumed to be established by to be established by be established by established by by the subject, the larger is ‘he numberof steps, given a numberof steps, given aof steps, given a steps, given a given a a fixed step size, to reach the boundary; ie, ie, it takes more takes more more time until a response is initiated. 

>This may be the typical case, but may be the typical case, but be the typical case, but the typical case, but typical case, but case, but but the model also allows for the 

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

203 

1.3. Mathematical Derivations for the Diffusion Model 

The time at which the stochastic process hits the upper boundary, ie., when a response is initiated, is of special interest. We consider a single state and ask for the probability distribution of the time T at which X(t) enters the state for the first time. In our case the state is an absorbing state and once the process has entered that state it will never leave it. Obviously J is a random variable taking values in the interval [0, oo) and it is called the “first passage time.”* The backward or Kolmogorov equation is appropriate to calculate the probability distribution of the first passage time since our objective is to determine the first passage time distribution as a function of the initial state x, for a fixed final state (Cox & Miller, 1977, p. 216). In the case of an unrestricted process, Le., the boundaries are +o and starting at time #)=0, the solution for the backward equation as a transition probability function for the Ornstein—Uhlenbeck process is a normal distribution with meano*(1 ~exp(Xx, exp(— —2t))/28. Bf) + (a/B\(1 Unfortunately, — exp(— no t}) closed and form variance solution is known for the case of an arbitrary boundary, e.g. one absorbing boundary and one reflecting boundary (see Ricciardi, 1977, p. 128; Bhattacharya & Waymire, 1990, p. 389). But there exist numerical methods based on limits of discrete-time Markov chains that provide practical approximations which will be used in the following (for a related approach see Busemeyer & Townsend, 1992). The discrete time Markov chain model is presented next. 

Presenting a stimulus evokes an information accumulation process. This process is represented by a variable A, called the state of information accumulation or activation. The state of activation changes over time, depending on how much information is available, producing a new state of activation at each moment in time, a stochastic process denotedsubject, the by A(t). response As soon is initiated. as A(t) We >c, assume a criterion that set activation by the changes by very small amounts during small time intervals. iat h,h>O,(t+h) = A(t+h)— denote a A(t) very the small change time interval of activation during and the interval A. AA(t+h) is a very small step equal to d6=6 Sh. In letting /# > 0 the time interval and the step size as a function of fA become infinitesimally smali, and the continuous-time and Markov process can be approximated by a discrete-time Markov chain (see Bhattacharya & Waymire, 1990, pp. 386-388; Cox & Miller, 1977, pp. 213-215). The parameter 4 is called the step size and the parameter a? is called the diffusion coefficient. We assume a_ time-homogeneous Markov chain; 1e., the transition probabilities depend only on the difference A(t +h) — A(t) 

> * An absorbing state is a recurrent state (Bhattacharya & Waymire, 1990, p.419) that guarantees the finiteness (with probability 1) of the passage time (Bhattacharya & Waymire, 1990, p. 423).

instead of A(t+h) and A(t). Therefore the transition probabilities are determined as 

==> picture [243 x 64] <==

==> picture [220 x 29] <==

Note that the transition probability functions p(x) and q(x) depend on the state x but not on the time ¢. The drift coefficient, x(x), and the diffusion coefficient, o?, for the discrete-time Markov chain can be defined by the first and second moments of 4A(1), conditioned on the previous state of activation, as follows: 

==> picture [243 x 58] <==

The drift and diffusion coefficients are functions of the time unit 4, which is taken to be a fixed constant. Its value is chosen a priori to be as close to zero as needed to make the discrete-time Markov chain model approximate the continuous-time Markov process as accurately as desired. The transition probabilities, p(x) and g(x), can be written as functions of the drift and diffusion coefficients, u(x) and 6, by solving for p(x) and q(x) in Eqs. (16) and (17). Assuming p(x)=1—g(x) and d=e JSh yields 

==> picture [179 x 60] <==

In order to obtain 0< p(x), g(x) <1, u{x)/o must be between —1/Jh and L/Sh. The stochastic process obtained 0 far can be defined by a stochastic difference equation, L.., 

==> picture [159 x 15] <==

or, writing 4A(t+) for A(t +h) — A(d), 

==> picture [194 x 15] <==

where e(t), a random variable, is a stochastic disturbance ferm with mean 0 and variance a7 for small h (see Cox & Miller, 1977, p. 207). Since the drift coefficient of the 

480/39/2-6 

204 

A. DIEDERICH 

_ 

Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process is u(x) =a— fx we get the followingactivation: stochastic difference equation for changes in 

==> picture [202 x 16] <==

To calculate the first passage time distribution and the expected value and the variance of the time the approximating process will need to hit the boundary, we have to determine the transition probability matrix for the Markov chain. This implies that we first have to define the state space of the process. Let S be a set of states of activation for the information accumulation process. The total number of states can be expressed as a function of the step size 6 and the criterion c by setting c= kd. Consequently 

==> picture [84 x 13] <==

and the cardinality of S is k + 1=m. Since the process is assumed never to skip states in its progress the transition matrix can be characterized as 

==> picture [148 x 48] <==

where p and g are defined earlier in Eq. (18) and Eq. (19). Note that the transition probabilities depend on the state in which the process is located. 

Usually the transition matrix T is presented in its canonical form. Let the m-state Markov chain consist of r recurrent states and (m—r) transient states. The transition matrix T can then be put in the form 

==> picture [54 x 35] <==

where P is an rxr matrix with transition probabilities among the recurrent states for its elements, Q is an (m—r)x(m—r) substochastic matrix (with at least one row sum less than 1) with probabilities of transition only among the transient states for its elements, and R is an (m—r)xr matrix whose elements are the probabilities of the one-step transition from the (m-—r) transient states to the r recurrent states. In our case P is a 1 x 1 matrix containing the number 1 since we just have one absorbing boundary, the criterion c. Q, an (m—1)x(m—1) matrix, contains the transition probabilities Py stated above except for the last row where p,,2= 1, otherwise zero, since we have one reflecting boundary. R, an (m—1) vector, contains the -. - . ; transition probability from the transient to the absorbing state, with the first element being g,,_,, zero otherwise. The 

==> picture [216 x 146] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
z
[1mom 20300
1 1/0 100:- 69 0 o of | om0 |
2 O}]pm 0 @ O -: 0 0 0 0 0
3 010 p 0 wm: 0 0 0 01] 0
0 0 pw O gw ::: R
=
- 0 o | o
Pn-s fms
me OPO GO Oe 8 Pea 0 ama} 0
a ce a a
™ foo oo 0 oo of | P
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 3. Transition matrix for the information accumulation process when one stimulus is presented. 

starting position of the process is considered next. At time t= the process is set in motion either by starting it at a fixed state i, called the initial state, or by randomly locating it in the state space according toa probability distribution Z on S, called the initial distribution. In the former case, Z is the distribution concentrated at the state ip, 1¢., Z,;= 1 if j=iy, Z,=0 ifj # ig. In the latter case, the probability is z; that at time zero the process will be found in state i, where 0<z,;<1 and >, z;=1. Thus the initial distribution Z is an over(m—r) the vector containing transient states. We the assume initial probability distribution that the process starts at time ¢ = 0 with probability 1, thus Z is an (m— 1) vector, With z, =1, zero otherwise. Figure 3 shows the mapping of this process to a transition matrix. 

To derive the equations for the mean reaction time we use standard methods developed in Markov chain theory (see, ©g-, Bhat, 1984; Bhattacharya & Waymire, 1990). 

Consider the probability of entering an absorbing state when the process leaves the class of transient states. It should be noted that if the process enters the absorbing state, it does not leave it. Let f{" be the probability that starting from transient state i, the process enters the absorbing state j in n steps. Noting that a transition from / to i is not possible, we can consider the number of steps as proportional to the time needed for a[first passage][ transition] from ito. If we define T ,,to represent this random variable, we may write fo as its distribution given by 

==> picture [71 x 70] <==

and let 

Le the probability to eventual passage to j. Let F” be the matrix with elements /‘”) and F be the matrix with elements id f,;. Then ~” 

==> picture [135 x 12] <==

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

205 

==> picture [187 x 111] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
129 eee
100ee
>
——
—————————
0———<—
10 a 50 60
----- End of picture text -----

_ 

IG. 4. The means of the discrete process as a function of the matrix_ en and 

==> picture [116 x 23] <==

==> picture [14 x 12] <==

where Q and R are defined earlier and I is the identity matrix (see, e.g., Bhat, 1984, p. 79). Considering that we start at a particular transient state, the probability distribution of the time to reach the criterion c starting at time t = 0, T,, .=T, equals oe 

==> picture [187 x 23] <==

where ae times to t= (n+ reach the 1)h. boundary The pth moment is therefore for the distribution of 

==> picture [218 x 24] <==

To see how well the continuous process can be mimicked by a discrete process the theoretical mean and the standard deviation are plotted as a function of the matrix size, m. Note that decreasing A, the time unit, corresponds to an increase in m, holding all other factors fixed. As can be seen matrix size above 6 by 6. For the standard deviation a matrix size of 10 by 10 gives already a good approximation. 

==> picture [250 x 137] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
60 Standard Deviation
5040 7
30 | = CT
20 nn
10a...10 EE
a 50 60
FIG. 5. The standard deviations of the discrete process as a function
of the matrix size m.
----- End of picture text -----

TABLE 1 

==> picture [225 x 77] <==

Different curves reflect different «’s, f’s, and criteria c presented in Table] (« and # being parameters for the Ornstein—-Uhlenbeck process). The first column of the table corresponds to the very upper lines in the figures, the second column to the second upper lines, etc. 

In the experiment three different stimuli are presented, 7, and t. ms apart. The first part of the process, i.e., when only one stimulus is presented, is exactly the same as described above. The process starts at z, at time ¢ = 0 with probability 1. At time ¢=1,, when the second stimulus is presented, the PFOCeSS May be somewhere between the absorbing and the reflectsng boundary. The location of the process at that point in time is the starting position for the new process that starts with a different drift coefficient at time f = 7,. Clearly we now have a defective probability distribution over all transientpresented, states. the process At time may t=7,, be. when somewhere the third between stimulus the is absorbing and the reflecting boundary. Again, a new process starts with a different drift coefficient at time t= Tt. 

2.3.1. Expected Value and Variance of the Reaction Time for the Multichannel Diffusion Model 

Like for the counter model, observed reaction time is 4ssumed to be additively composed of the stimulus processing time, denoted by 7, plus all processes following or Preceding it (e.g., temporal uncertainty of stimulus onset), denoted by R. T and R are again assumed to be stochastitime and for the variances respectively we have 

==> picture [198 x 12] <==

==> picture [208 x 13] <==

Like for the counter model, if we assume the mean and the variance of R to be constant, ie, E(R)=r and V(R) = 02, Eq. (23) and Eq. (24) then simplify, respectively, to 

==> picture [83 x 26] <==

and 

==> picture [109 x 12] <==

206 

A. DIEDERICH 

The corresponding expected value E[ 7] is corresponding expected value E[ 7] is expected value E[ 7] is value E[ 7] is E[ 7] is 7] is is 

The corresponding expected value E[ 7] is corresponding expected value E[ 7] is expected value E[ 7] is value E[ 7] is E[ 7] is 7] is is Using spectral analytic methods the matrix computation can be greatly simplified. A tridiagonal transition matrix Q ry NZ . . . . = 4° * . . _ ELT] =h (2 py, QRni-t + 2Q5An a 1Q;tie-in +1)R24is real similar valued matrix to a symmetric D such tridiagonal that DQD matrix, —'=S, 1.c., where there existsS is a oo symmetric tridiagonal matrix (see Horn & Johnson, 1990, +Z'Q7TQP-™ FY IQY-wes "Rs ) (25) p. 174). This fact guarantees that Q has m — 1 linearly indef=m+1 pendent eigenvectors and m—1 real eigenvectors (Horn & h d h ti tri th Johnson, 1990). According to the Frobenius—Perron waste Qi, Q2, and Qi, Q2, and and Q; are the transition Matrices Wi are the transition Matrices Wi transition Matrices Wi Matrices Wi theorem (Bhattacharya & Waymire, 1990, Chap. 3), all of transient states for the first, second, and third part of the states for the first, second, and third part of the the first, second, and third part of the first, second, and third part of the second, and third part of the and third part of the third part of the part of the of the the the eigenvalues in Q are less than | in magnitude. Therefore process, respectively; n, and n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, respectively; n, and n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, and n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, and 1,/h—-1, 1,/h—-1, we factor Q as ° 

h d h ti tri th waste Qi, Q2, and Qi, Q2, and and Q; are the transition Matrices Wi are the transition Matrices Wi transition Matrices Wi Matrices Wi transient states for the first, second, and third part of the states for the first, second, and third part of the the first, second, and third part of the first, second, and third part of the second, and third part of the and third part of the third part of the part of the of the the process, respectively; n, and n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, respectively; n, and n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, and n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, n, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, are t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, t,/h—1 and 1,/h—-1, and 1,/h—-1, 1,/h—-1, respectively. R,, R,, and R, are the vectors that contain the transition probability from the transient to the absorbing state for the first, second, and third part of the process. Z’'Q’' is the initial defective distribution for the second part and Z'Q''Q3?~"! is the initial defective distribution for the third part of the process. Setting the transition matrices T, =T,=T; implies Q, = Q,=Q,; and R, =R,=R;. This leads to a diffusion process where only one stimulus is presented. The variance is 

==> picture [155 x 35] <==

==> picture [64 x 13] <==

where P is the matrix of linear independent eigenvectors, and A is the diagonal matrix of real valued eigenvalues less than one in magnitude for the matrix Q. 

==> picture [116 x 23] <==

where 

==> picture [247 x 93] <==

3. AN EXPERIMENTAL TEST OF INTERSENSORY FACILITATION 

As the preceding sections have shown, both the counter and the diffusion7 . model are mathematically. quite. distinct.os The superposition model assumes discrete increments of informationincrements occur accumulated according continuously to a Poisson over distribution, time. The the time elapsing between two pieces of information is exponentially distributed. On the other side the diffusion model assumes continuous accrual of information accumulated continuously over time having a Gaussian transition probability function for the unrestricted case. The consideration of a special diffusion process, the Ornstein— Uhlenbeck process, was motivated by studies of neuronal activity dynamics postulating that activity grows nonlinearly toward an asymptote and that the amount of activation decays to its starting level when information is no longer available. 

For computational purposes the equations for the expected value and the second moment can be greatly simplified (for derivation see Appendix), 

==> picture [91 x 20] <==

==> picture [203 x 73] <==

27 — p27 7!

E[T*] =A [Z((2— _ Qi) —3_(pe—(I- QU—2\/ J Q7)QO” —(211—Q,)7+2,1-—Q7')2,Q7)R,

The experiment,. described. in. detail. below, was primarily. . cesigne’degreeoreover, both to, it models test was the intended are able presenceto to of test describe intetsensory whether. the and intersensory factitation.: to what facilitation effect. However, it was not meant to differentiate between the models, 

==> picture [204 x 89] <==

Subjects. Four right-handed subjects (PM, KK, GH BO), three female and one male, associated with> > the3 psychology department of Oldenburg University, participated in the experiment. They received required subject hours and/or 10 DM per hour for their participation. 

where Z3 = Z'Q” and Z, = Z'Q7Q9?-™. 

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

207 

Apparatus. The visual stimulus was a flash (250 Lux) of ig 8 duration generated by a strobe (SUNPAK auto 36 DX, Thyristor) and projected onto a projection screen (REVUE LUXUS, 1 m x 1.2 m) at a distance of 3.5 m. The strobe was mounted in a separate room behind a small hole in the wall so that the click of the release was not audible. The auditory stimulus was a sinusoidal tone of 1000 Hz which could be varied in 10dB SPL steps. It was presented diotically by closed headphones (Philipp HP 8665/00). To generate the tactile stimulus an oscillation exciter (Briiel & Kjaer, Type 4809) was used. On this oscillation exciter an aluminum plate (35mmx50mm) was mounted on a_ threaded bolt. The aluminum plate served as toe rest. For damping purposes the oscillation exciter was encapsulated in a wooden box which was mounted on a rubber foil and which had a small hole for the bolt with the aluminum plate. The oscillation exciter was controlled by sinusoidal voltage (27.7 Hz) at three levels. The intensities and the frequencies of the tactile stimuli were determined by a pretest for getting a maximal level below the subjects’ hearing threshold and the minimal excitation above the tactile threshold. To suppress initial noise the voltage for the vibration exciter was generated by a computer (type PDP 11/34) and started always at zero. The computer signal was smoothed by alow pass filter and amplified according to three intensities. The tone and the tactile stimulus were response terminated to avoid switch-off effects. The whole experiment (timing of the signals, reaction time measurement, randomization of trials, calculation of the time between the attention signal and the first stimulus) was controlled by the computer. 

Procedure. The subject was seated in a dark, soundabsorbing room, 2.5 m away from the screen. Two response buttons mounted on a desk in front of her/him served as response device. The right foot (without shoe and sock) of the subject was put on a wooden box and the big toe was put on an aluminum plate. To prevent it from slipping out of place the foot was strapped on. The subject was instructed to press the response buttons with the right and the left index finger at the same time as soon as she/he noticed any of the stimuli. The beginning of each trial was signaled to the subject by a small warning lamp in front of the screen. After a random foreperiod a single stimulus or a stimulus combination was presented. The single stimuli were visual stimuli (Condition V), auditory stimuli with 70, 80, or 90 dB SPL (Condition A70, A80, or A90, respectively), and tactile stimuli with three different intensities (Condition Tl, T2, T3, where T3 was the most intense stimulus). Due to individual differences in reaction times subjects PM and KK were presented with conditions V, A80, A90, T2, and T3; subjects GH and BO were presented with conditions V, A70, A90, Tl, and T3 to have the timesreaction to time the different in a certain single range, stimulus conditions i.e., to have the not reaction too 

close together and not too far apart. The double stimuli were combinations of any two stimuli of two different modalities. For example, the visual stimulus was followed _ by a 70-dB tone z ms later (Condition VA70(rz)). The range of the interstimulus intervals was determined for each subject and for each stimulus combination individually. The difference in reaction time between the reaction times of two different single stimulus conditions after the training session was the mean around which the interstimulus intervals were established. Maximal intersensory facilitation can be expected when the interstimulus interval between two signals equals this difference, ic., when physiological synchrony, rather than stimulus synchrony, is achieved (see Hershenson, 1962, Nickerson, 1973). The range enclosed six different intervals in steps of 10 ms. The triple stimuli were combinations of three stimuli of three different modalities, e.g., a weak tactile stimulus followed by the visual stimulus _t, later and followed by a 70-dB tone rT, ms later (Condition T1VA70(t,,7,)). For the triple stimulus condition, four different interstimulus intervals in steps of 10 ms were determined between the first and the second presented stimulus as well as between the second and the third stimulus. All stimulus combinations presented to the subjects can be seen in Table 2. 

TABLE 2 

Stimulus Combinations for All Subjects 

+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Subject           |  |                                            |             | Double           | Triple                       |               |
| Single            |  |                                            |             | r= 0,..,50       |  T2VARO(r1, 72) 71= 20... 50 |               |
| PM,KK V — VA80(7) |  |                                            |             | r= 0,...,50      | ™2= 50,...,80                |               |
| A80               |  |                                            |             | T= 90,...,80     | TSVABA(TL,%) = 0... 30       |               |
|  -VAQO(r)         |  |                                            |             | r= Oy. 80        | 7 Dy 60                      |               |
| AGO               |  |                                            |             |  7 8080          | TAVASAC UT) T= 10... 40      |               |
| T2V(t)            |  |                                            |             |  - Ioan          | Be                           |               |
| TR                |  |                                            |             |  r= 20,...,70    | TIVAT0(n7)                   |               |
| TIV(F)            |  |                                            |             | 7=0,..80         | n= 20,..,80                  |               |
| TS                |  |                                            |             |                  |                              |               |
| TIABIT) 7         |  |                                            |             |                  |                              |               |
| nssney -          |  |                                            |             |                  |                              |               |
| T3A90(r) r=       |  |                                            |             |                  |                              |               |
| GH.               |  |                                            |             |                  |                              |               |
| V..               |  |                                            |             |                  |                              |               |
| VATO(r)           |  |                                            |             |                  |                              |               |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  | AT                                         | VA90(r)_    | r= 0,...,50      |                              | r= 50,...,80  |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  | A90                                        | -TIV(r)     | r= 30,...,80     | T3VA70(m1,1)                 | n= 0,...,30   |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  | Tl                                         | = T3V{r)—   | r= 0,...,50      |                              | 72= 30,...,60 |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  | T3 —                                       | — TIA70{(r) | r='30,...,80     | TIVA9D(7,72) =               | = 40,...,70   |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| sO                |  |                                            | TIA90(r) r= | r= 50... 100     | 72= 70. 200                  |               |
| Am                |  |                                            | TSATO(z) 7= |  7= 04... 50     |  TIVATION                    |               |
| A                 |  |                                            | My —        |  —aa TIVATION    | a - so                       |               |
| Tl                |  |                                            | -VAo0(r) _  |  _ ae            | a0                           |               |
|                   |  |                                            | TIV(Gr)     | re 40.....80 PVA |  PVA re 0... 80              |               |
|                   |  |                                            | -T3Vir)     | r= 0....50       | m= 30,...,60                 |               |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  | TS                                         | TIAT0(r) r= | r= 30,...,80     | TIVA9O(n,m2)                 | n= 30,...,60  |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  |                                            | TIA90(r)    | r= 30,50,...,90  |                              | r= 60,...,90  |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  |                                            | T3A70(r)    | r= 0,...,50      |                              |               |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
|                   |  |                                            | T3A90(r)    | T= 10,...,60     |                              |               |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Note.             |  | increases in 10-ms intervals. For example, |             |                  |                              |               |
| t increases       |  | t = 0, ..., 50 would be                    |             |                  |                              |               |
| interpreted as    |  |  as 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50.                 |             |                  |                              |               |
+-------------------+--+--------------------------------------------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+---------------+

480/39 2-7 

208 

A. DIEDERICH 

The subject was instructed to press the response buttons with the index fingers as fast as possible upon detecting either signal (no catch trials). The reaction time was recorded from stimulus onset to keypress for each hand separately. After the last response there was a 3-s pause before the beginning of the next trial was signaled. The first response in each trial terminated the auditory or the tactile signal. The purpose of the random foreperiod was to avoid anticipatory responses. The random foreperiod was never responses. The random foreperiod was never The random foreperiod was never random foreperiod was never foreperiod was never was never never _ tion functions for these models, the number of observations functions for these models, the number of observations for these models, the number of observations these models, the number of observations models, the number of observations the number of observations number of observations of observations observations less than 1s. In every trial, an exponentially distributed random duration was added to a I-s base time, ie., 1000 + 1000{ —/n(x)), xe [0.1, 1], where x is a uniformly distributed random number. The maximum duration of the foreperiod was therefore about 3.3 s. Ifa response occurred prior to stimulus onset, a rattle indicated this anticipatory response, and a repetition of the trial followed. Very few anticipatory responses actually occurred {about 1 in 500 trials). A block of single stimuli consisted of 20 trials for one modality (no mixture of stimuli for different modalities). A block of double stimuli consisted of 60 trials for a particular stimulus combination. The interstimulus intervals between the stimuli were in random order, and each ISI was presented ten times in a single block. A block of triple stimuli consisted of 64 trials fora particular stimulus combination. The ISIs between the stimuli were presented randomly, and a certain ISI combination (between the first and the second certain ISI combination (between the first and the second ISI combination (between the first and the second combination (between the first and the second (between the first and the second the first and the second first and the second and the second the second second _ size of the transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is the transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is i.e., m. The time constant / is m. The time constant / is The time constant / is time constant / is is and the first and the third) was presented four times in each block. A single experimental! session started with ten triple stimuli trials. It functioned as a warming-up period and was not used later in the data analysis. The intensities of the stimuli were different from those used in the experiment. Ina random balanced order two or three single stimulus blocks, two or three double stimuli blocks, and two or three triple stimuli blocks were presented, but at most seven blocks were presented per session. After the training block and three experimental blocks there was a rest period ofat most 10 min (the subject decided the actual length). After three further blocks there was again a rest period of maximum 10min. Each session took about 60-75 min. By request the subject was informed about her/his reaction times. Including the training period (about 5 h) each subject was involved in the period (about 5 h) each subject was involved in the (about 5 h) each subject was involved in the 5 h) each subject was involved in the h) each subject was involved in the each subject was involved in the subject was involved in the was involved in the involved in the in the the _ probabilities in the transition matrix. From a psychological in the transition matrix. From a psychological the transition matrix. From a psychological transition matrix. From a psychological matrix. From a psychological From a psychological a psychological psychological experiment for about 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 for about 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 about 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 h. For each subject a sample of 200 For each subject a sample of 200 each subject a sample of 200 subject a sample of 200 a sample of 200 sample of 200 of 200 200 _ responses was taken in each of the five single stimulus conditions; a sample of 100 responses was taken in each of the 48 double stimulus conditions (8 different stimulus combinations and 6 different ISIs), and a sample of 100 responses was taken in each of the 48 triple-stimulus conditions (3 different stimulus combinations and 16 different ISIcombinations).In total, each subject’s responses numbered 10,600. 

parameters from the mean response times to the triplestimulus conditions. Then we used these estimates to calculate predictions for the means and variances for the double-stimulus conditions. The triple-stimulus conditions were used to estimate the intensity parameters because these conditions provided a more comprehensive database than the double-stimulus conditions. Although it would, in principle, be possible to predict and test the entire RT distribution functions for these models, the number of observations functions for these models, the number of observations for these models, the number of observations these models, the number of observations models, the number of observations the number of observations number of observations of observations observations per condition (100) was too small to apply efficient nonparametric estimation procedures (e.g., spline estimation). For the superposition’model five parameters were estimated from the means for a triple stimulus combination, e.g., T1VA/70: the residual constant r, the critical count number c, and the intensity parameters «47, %y, and a7, for the auditory, visual, and tactile stimulus, respectively. For one triple stimulus condition we have 16 different interstimulus interval combinations and thus at least 16 mean reaction times. 

anticipatory responses. The random foreperiod was never responses. The random foreperiod was never The random foreperiod was never random foreperiod was never foreperiod was never was never never _ tion functions for these models, the number of observations functions for these models, the number of observations for these models, the number of observations these models, the number of observations models, the number of observations the number of observations number of observations of observations observations 

For the diffusion model, seven parameters for each triple stimulus combination need to be determined: the intensity parameters a,, ay, and a, for the auditory, visual, and tactile stimulus, respectively; the parameter £, the force directed toward the origin; the residual constant r; the diffusion coefficient o”; and the boundary c in terms of the of the transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is the transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is i.e., m. The time constant / is m. The time constant / is The time constant / is time constant / is is not estimated from the data but is chosen as close to zero as needed to approximate a continuous time process. For our data we decided / to be 1 ms. Considering Eq. (18) and Eq. (19) for p(x) and g(x) it is obvious that nothing is lost in setting ag = 1. Since the step size 6 was defined as 6 = o/h, we have 6 = 1. The criterion c was expressed in terms of the step size, i.e., c=k6d, and the size of the transition matrix m was defined as m =k + 1. Thus the matrix size is ¢ + 1. 8 was thought to be a function of the intensity parameters and the matrix size, ie., 8 = y(1+«)/m, a being the corresponding intensity parameter or one of its combinations and y a number between 0 and | to be estimated. A technical reason for this was to constrain the drift rates u(x) to take on values between 0 and 1, since the drift rates functioned as probabilities in the transition matrix. From a psychological in the transition matrix. From a psychological the transition matrix. From a psychological transition matrix. From a psychological matrix. From a psychological From a psychological a psychological psychological point of view it is reasonable because with increasing inten- of view it is reasonable because with increasing inten- view it is reasonable because with increasing inten- it is reasonable because with increasing inten- is reasonable because with increasing inten- reasonable because with increasing inten- because with increasing inten- with increasing inten- increasing inten- intensity of a stimulus, the force directed to the origin should become larger. Thus, there remain six parameters to be estimated from the means: «,, a), %7, Fr, ™M, }. 

a certain ISI combination (between the first and the second certain ISI combination (between the first and the second ISI combination (between the first and the second combination (between the first and the second (between the first and the second the first and the second first and the second and the second the second second _ size of the transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is the transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is transition matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is matrix, i.e., m. The time constant / is i.e., m. The time constant / is m. The time constant / is The time constant / is time constant / is is 

training period (about 5 h) each subject was involved in the period (about 5 h) each subject was involved in the (about 5 h) each subject was involved in the 5 h) each subject was involved in the h) each subject was involved in the each subject was involved in the subject was involved in the was involved in the involved in the in the the _ probabilities in the transition matrix. From a psychological in the transition matrix. From a psychological the transition matrix. From a psychological transition matrix. From a psychological matrix. From a psychological From a psychological a psychological psychological 

experiment for about 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 for about 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 about 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 40 h. For each subject a sample of 200 h. For each subject a sample of 200 For each subject a sample of 200 each subject a sample of 200 subject a sample of 200 a sample of 200 sample of 200 of 200 200 _ point of view it is reasonable because with increasing inten- of view it is reasonable because with increasing inten- view it is reasonable because with increasing inten- it is reasonable because with increasing inten- is reasonable because with increasing inten- reasonable because with increasing inten- because with increasing inten- with increasing inten- increasing inten- inten- 

For each subject, we have three different triple stimulus combinations (e.g., T1VA70, T3VA70, T1VA90); thus we have five different intensity parameters: ay for light, 479 for the 70-dB tone, «9 for the 90-dB tone, «, for the weak tactile stimulus, «7, for the strong tactile stimulus. To obtain a single common estimate of each intensity parameter, we estimated all of the parameters simultaneously across all three triple stimulus conditions. The criterion c was assumed to be constant across all three conditions, because 

4. PARAMETER ESTIMATION 

The following strategy was used to test the coactivation models. First, we estimated all of the crucial intensity 

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

209 

the same qualitative stimuli always appeared and in the samemeans), order. we estimated Thus, for all nine three parameters triple stimulus conditions from the data for (48 the superposition model: the intensity parameters ay, %,7, Zag, X7,, and a,;; three residual parameters Ty Pa, and rs; and one critical count number c. For the multichannel diffusion model we estimated ten parameters from the means: the intensity parameters %y, 479, %aoo, Mrz, and a+4; three residual parameters r,, r,, and r,; the matrix size m; and y. 

TABLE 3 

==> picture [217 x 34] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Mean Response Time. oe One Stimulus Conditions. ..  for
All Subjects
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [128 x 116] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
|| po | KK | cH | pM |
|T1 faiezs| - [22030 | -
)72 |, = [20248 | | 187.98.
} 73 || 174.84 | 193.75 | 176.70 | 172.82,
| V_|[ 165.45 | 166.42 | 164.80 | 156.60,
[xo] frm] [ima
iw fra es
----- End of picture text -----

These parameters were estimated by minimizing the 

2 

==> picture [201 x 33] <==

using the optimization program GAUSS.OPTMUM. M,, represents the observed mean RT for the ith stimutus interval combination (t,, T2} in the jth triple stimulus combina; ; . tion; £,,[7] represents the predicted stimulus processing time for the ith interstimulus interval combination in the jth triple stimulus combination; r,; represents the residual time in the /th triple stimulus combination. The variances were not included in the estimation procedure because they were considered too noisy.° 

From this order we expect the relation between the intensity parameters to be 

==> picture [184 x 12] <==

since the subjects generally responded fastest to the 90-dB '®: second fastest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest second fastest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest fastest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest tone, etc., and slowest etc., and slowest and slowest slowest to the weakest tactile stimulus. While there are some the weakest tactile stimulus. While there are some weakest tactile stimulus. While there are some tactile stimulus. While there are some stimulus. While there are some While there are some there are some are some some ‘dividual speed differences, the pattern is about the same speed differences, the pattern is about the same differences, the pattern is about the same the pattern is about the same pattern is about the same is about the same about the same the same same the subject group PM and KK as for the subject group subject group PM and KK as for the subject group group PM and KK as for the subject group PM and KK as for the subject group and KK as for the subject group KK as for the subject group as for the subject group for the subject group the subject group subject group group GH and BO, which in each case had different stimulus and BO, which in each case had different stimulus BO, which in each case had different stimulus which in each case had different stimulus in each case had different stimulus each case had different stimulus case had different stimulus had different stimulus different stimulus stimulus ‘CONditions. a, 

The predictions for the double stimulus conditions were '®: second fastest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest second fastest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest fastest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest to the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest the 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest 70-dB tone, etc., and slowest tone, etc., and slowest etc., and slowest and slowest slowest then generated as follows. The intensity parameters to the weakest tactile stimulus. While there are some the weakest tactile stimulus. While there are some weakest tactile stimulus. While there are some tactile stimulus. While there are some stimulus. While there are some While there are some there are some are some some estimated from the triple stimulus conditions were used to ‘dividual speed differences, the pattern is about the same speed differences, the pattern is about the same differences, the pattern is about the same the pattern is about the same pattern is about the same is about the same about the same the same same compute the predictions for the double stimulus conditions. 1 the subject group PM and KK as for the subject group subject group PM and KK as for the subject group group PM and KK as for the subject group PM and KK as for the subject group and KK as for the subject group KK as for the subject group as for the subject group for the subject group the subject group subject group group In addition, for the diffusion model, the value of the GH and BO, which in each case had different stimulus and BO, which in each case had different stimulus BO, which in each case had different stimulus which in each case had different stimulus in each case had different stimulus each case had different stimulus case had different stimulus had different stimulus different stimulus stimulus parameter gamma (used to determine the restoring force) ‘CONditions. a, estimated from the triple stimulus conditions was used again For the multichannel diffusion model the expected order the multichannel diffusion model the expected order multichannel diffusion model the expected order diffusion model the expected order model the expected order the expected order expected order with the double stimulus conditions. However, the residual Of the intensity parameters (estimated from the triple the intensity parameters (estimated from the triple intensity parameters (estimated from the triple parameters (estimated from the triple (estimated from the triple from the triple the triple triple time, r, and the criterion, c, for the counter and the diffusion stimulus conditions) was observed for all subjects (see conditions) was observed for all subjects (see was observed for all subjects (see observed for all subjects (see for all subjects (see all subjects (see subjects (see (see models may have changed across blocks of trials with difTable 4). 4). ferent qualitative stimulus combinations. Therefore, one criterion, c, and one residual, r, were re-estimated for each of TABLE 4 double stimulus condition (6 means). With these estimated parameters we also predicted the standard deviations of the Estimated Parameters of the Triple Stimulus Condition for RT for all triple stimulus and double stimulus conditions. the Multichanne! Diffusion Model 

For the multichannel diffusion model the expected order the multichannel diffusion model the expected order multichannel diffusion model the expected order diffusion model the expected order model the expected order the expected order expected order Of the intensity parameters (estimated from the triple the intensity parameters (estimated from the triple intensity parameters (estimated from the triple parameters (estimated from the triple (estimated from the triple from the triple the triple triple stimulus conditions) was observed for all subjects (see conditions) was observed for all subjects (see was observed for all subjects (see observed for all subjects (see for all subjects (see all subjects (see subjects (see (see Table 4). 4). 

Before describing the main results, we note that the differences between the RT of the right hand and the RT of the left hand were negligible. In the remaining we consider only the RT of the left hand (chosen by chance). First consider the results for the single stimulus conditions. 

Consistent with previous research, the mean response times observed in the present experiment (Table 3) generally imply the following ordering of stimulus conditions for subjects BO and GH: 

==> picture [112 x 16] <==

> 

When the variances were included the objective function grew dramatically up to the 10-fold, 20-fold, and more. 

==> picture [131 x 161] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
| m |) is | a | 33 | 12 |
ler, | 0.0929! - |ovcss} - |
far. | - | 0.0965) - | 0.0723 |
| cers | 0.2258 | 0.1726 | 0.1266 | 0.1759 |
Fay | 0.2046 | 0.2866 | 0.3151 | 0.2496 |
Fea |oa7a| - losis, -
ream]. foasso| - | orase|
=
See
| ry |] 130.56 | 116.70 | 126.04 | 119.59,
Tr Paras [nese [80s [iie00
} rs] 129.39 | 118.38 | 120.59 | 117.28 |
----- End of picture text -----

210 

A. DIEDERICH 

TABLE 5 

Estimated Parameters of the Triple Stimulus Condition for the Superposition Model 

==> picture [132 x 164] <==

+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| |_| Bo | xx | cu | pm |   |                       |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| fe                        | f 2 f2f7ita_          |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| rar [omer]                |                       |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| are                       | [aoe]                 |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| “ors                      | | - [oorse] = [0.0470 |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| Fav                       | _|| 0.601 2           | 0 | u0 | [oan 0.0380 |        |
|                           |                       |   | [0.0982 ae [oars | 0.0775 |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| jaar fo2073| - forzs| - | |                       |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| foam] _- [aan | -_ [aaar  |                       |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| mf 080 [o4a6t | 295       |                       |   |                           |
| [2.007                    |                       |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| Pry [iszis | 1228 [nero | |                       |   |                           |
| 122.72 |                  |                       |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+
| |ee ra |                  | ee ae                 |   |                           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+---+---------------------------+

However, for the superposition model, the expected order of the intensity parameters (also estimated from the triple stimulus conditions) was not observed for two subjects, GH and PM. For them an appropriate restriction in the program led to the parameters shown in Table 5. Thus, for : subject GH the intensity parameters for the 70-dB tone and the 90-dB tone are identical. For subject PM the intensity parameters for the strong tactile stimulus and the light are identical as are the parameters for the tones of different 

For both models the estimated residual times r,, r,, and r, are relatively invariant within subjects and they are large compared to the overall observed mean RTs. For both models the fits of the means for the triple stimulus condition are very good for all subjects. The predictions of the standard deviations for the triple stimulus conditions are poor for ail subjects under most conditions. This is supported by looking at the standard error d(s) of the sample standard deviation (Cramer, 1974) 

where x; denotes the ith observation, ¥ the sample mean, s the sample standard deviation, and n the sample size, n= 100. d(s) was never larger than 3. The predictions were either too small (sometimes smaller than 1, the smallest observed standard deviation being about 10) or too large (about 37, the largest observed standard deviation being less than 29). For each subject the fit was somewhat better in 3 to 5 out of 12 stimulus conditions, but the best fitting conditions varied for each subject. For our parameter estimates, increasing, decreasing, or constant standard deviations as a function of the first interstimulus interval 

could be found. The patterns of the predicted standard deviations are very similar in both models. For some triple stimulus conditions the predicted standard deviations are almost identical for both models, for other conditions the predictions differ only by a constant. Table 6 depicts some of these results. The whole set of results can be found in Diederich (1992a). 

TABLE 6 Subject| GH: Observed and Predicted, Mean Reaction_ Times and St imulus,andard Deviations T1, Followed for by Triple a Visual Stimulus, Condition T1VA70 V, Followed (Weak Tactile by a 70-dB Tone, A70) 

==> picture [214 x 416] <==

+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
| (1,72) Mean RT      | SD     | SuperpositionMulti |       |      |
| weuitiSuperposition |        | channel            |       |      |
| channel             |        |                    |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 173.60 | 11.37              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 177.91 | 10.50              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 181.85 | 10.04              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 185.52 | 9.99               |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | ;      |                    |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 176.07 | 14:39              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 181.53 | 13.00              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 185.82 | 10.93              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 189.89 | 10.39              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 177.98 | 14.85              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 183.64 | 13.72              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 188.86 | 12.54              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
| (50,70)             | 197.95 | a                  | 21.50 | 1475 |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 178.98 | 16.18              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 185.05 | 15.35              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 190.87 | 14.34              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+
|                     | 196.28 | 13.29              |       |      |
+---------------------+--------+--------------------+-------+------+

Note. The first and the second stimulus are t, ms apart, the first and the third stimulus are rt, ms apart. 

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

211 

TABLE 7 

TABLE 9 

Subject GH: Observed and Predicted Mean Reaction Times and stnae Tt torpo sieeesee actile Stimulus, 1h, Homowed by a visual, ¥, T ms Apar 

Subject GH: Observed and Predicted Mean Reaction Times and Se 

Standard Deviations for Double Stimulus Condition VA70 (visual Stimulus, V, Followed by a 70-dB Tone, A70, t ms Apart) 

+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    | Observed | Prediction    | Observed | Prediction    |
|    |          | Superposition |          | Superposition |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 7  | Mean RT  | Multi channel | SD       | Multi channel |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 160.11        |          | 10.64         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| $  | 160.73   | 160.42        | 21.04    | 12.12         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 166.09        |          | 10.71         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 10 | 166.56   | 165.06        | 18.85    | 12.47         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 171.65        |          | 11.42         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 30 | 172.77   | 171.00        | 16.69    | 13.73         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 176.35        |          | 13.09         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 30 | 174.04   | 176.16        | 17.26    | 16.07         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 180.01        |          | 15.39         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 40 | 179.45   | 180.41        | 19.05    | 18.97         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 182.70        |          | 17.80         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+

+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    | Observed | Prediction    | Observed | Prediction    |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | Superposition |          | Superposition |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 7  | Mean RT  | Multi channel | SD       | Multi channel |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 136.64        |          | 9.02          |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 0  | =:188.21 | 137.65        | 25.37    | 9.47          |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 142.19        |          | 9.06          |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 10 | 141.51   | 142.94        | 16.71    | 4.34          |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 147.38        |          | 9.65          |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 20 | 149.02   | 148.28        | 18.24    | 6.88          |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 151.65        |          | 11.26         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 30 | —-150.83 | 151.70        | 14.30    | 10.06         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 154.72        |          | 13.46         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
|    |          | 156.71        |          | 15.56         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+
| 50 | 154.96   | 154.97        | 15.50    | 14.84         |
+----+----------+---------------+----------+---------------+

7 

For all double stimulus conditions the fit for the means was almost perfect for all subjects for both models. The predictions for the standard deviation for the double stimulus conditions was poor for all subjects under almost all conditions. Tables 7, 8, and 9 depict some of these results. (See Diederich (1992a) for detailed results) Comparing both models by the sum of squared errors for the means gave a slight advantage to the multichannel diffusion model (see Table 10). Note that the number of parameters estimated for the double stimulus condition is the same for = poth models. 

TABLE 8 

Subject GH: Observed and Predicted Mean Reaction Times and Standard Deviations for Double Condition T1A90 (Weak Tactile Stimulus, T1, Followed by a 99dB Tone, A90, t ms Apart) 

TABLE 10 

Sum of Squared Errors of the Means for the Poisson Superposition Model (SP) and the Multichannel Diffusion Model (DI 

+----+------------+---------------+-------+---------------+
|    |            | Superposition |       | Superposition |
+----+------------+---------------+-------+---------------+
| 7  | Mean RT    | .             | SD    | .             |
+----+------------+---------------+-------+---------------+
| 60 | «187.46    |               | 12.62 | 14.54         |
+----+------------+---------------+-------+---------------+
| 70 | ~—-:196.02 |               | 23.82 |               |
+----+------------+---------------+-------+---------------+
|    |            | 201.49        |       | 17.54         |
+----+------------+---------------+-------+---------------+
|    |            | 207.77        |       | 19.10         |
+----+------------+---------------+-------+---------------+

+-----------+--------+--------------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| “va [|    | [|     | [| — [ae [ae       |                     | oe Pe           |
+-----------+--------+--------------------+---------------------+-----------------+
|           |        | :                  |                     |                 |
+-----------+--------+--------------------+---------------------+-----------------+
|           | |      |                    | —                   |                 |
+-----------+--------+--------------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| jtia7o || | || s65 | s65 | a6 | - | - | | | 29 | ne | - | - | |                 |
+-----------+--------+--------------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| Fras [|   | [|     | [| - [| mo | wa) - |                     | | = | ier |162| |
+-----------+--------+--------------------+---------------------+-----------------+

212 

A. DIEDERICH 

Including the deviation from the empirical variances in the estimation procedure did not improve the overall results. The variances were still far from an optimal fit and the fit for the mean worsened considerably. 

6. DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY 

An experiment was conducted investigating intersensory facilitation of reaction times with stimuli of three different modalities (light, tone in two different intensities, vibration in two different intensities). Any combination of two different modalities and some combinations of three different modalities were presented at different interstimulus intervals. Three different models to explain the observed facilitation of reaction time were considered: a separate activation model, a superposition model, and a diffusion model, the last two belonging to the general class of coactivation models. Using Boole’s inequality as a test for separate activation models Diederich (1992a, b) was able to show that these models cannot predict as much facilitation as observed in the data. This result is consistent with earlier work by Diederich (1985), Diederich & Colonius (1987), Gielen et a/. (1983), Miller (1982), and others. Note that the test applies to the observable reaction time distribution. Assuming the observable reaction time is divided into additive components of processing time and residual time, the test applies only if the distributions of the processing time, S, and the residual time, R, are assumed to be invariant across stimulus conditions, ie., the test assumes context independence. This assumption on the relation between S and R might be too simplistic and was dropped in the case of considering coactivation models. To be more fair to separate activation models specific assumptions about the variation of the residual time across various stimulus conditions have to be established requiring further research. 

Both coactivation models make identical predictions about the ordering of the intensity parameters. For the diffusion model the expected ordering was observed for all four subjects whereas for the superposition model the relation was observed for two subjects. The fit for both the superposition model and the diffusion model was very good with respect to the means in the triple stimulus condition for all subjects. The intensity parameters estimated from triple stimulus conditions were then used to predict the means for the double stimulus conditions. The fit was very good for the superpositionwe model and almost perfect for the diffusionvon: model measured against the objective functions stated in Eq. (29). The fit for the standard deviations was poor forall subjects for both the triple stimulus conditions and the double stimulus conditions under both coactivation models. These results suggest that coactivation type models are able to account for intersensory facilitation at the level of the mean reaction times. 

Our results, however, also indicate that the variability in the data has not been captured sufficiently by the coactivation models studied here. One reason for the poor fit of the standard deviation might be that the residual time is not independent of the processing time. We assumed that the observed reaction time consists of two additive variables: the stimulus processing time and a residual time in which all remaining processes were lumped together. For simplicity we chose the mean and the variance of residual time to be constant within a given condition. But since the residual time is much larger than the observed reaction time it is plausible that the residual] time contains processes that are not independent from the processing time but contribute an important part to the overall variance. However, simply adding a constant to the predicted variance does not solve the problem because the difference between the observed and predicted variance is not constant across ISIs within a given stimulus configuration. The pattern of the deviations of the variance predictions is complex but there is no systematic pattern observable across subjects and/or experimental conditions. Thus, the next step in developing theory would be to give up the independence between the stimulus processing time and the residual time or, more generally, to make an assumption about the bivariate distribution of S and R. 

APPENDIX 

Derivation of Eq. (3) 

_ _ 

Naa) aenaa) +Nv()+No(t) and let (1) = A ue 

==> picture [206 x 34] <==

and 

==> picture [223 x 96] <==

and therefore 

==> picture [246 x 83] <==

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

213 

With 

P(S;(S,<t\k)< t|k) — -P(S P(S;., +1 <t}k) k) = P(N,P( *(t) =i) 

it follows 

te 

==> picture [246 x 59] <==

Derivation of Eq. (11) 

For positive random variables, 

==> picture [107 x 21] <==

Derivation in three parts: 

() O0<t<t,. 

==> picture [213 x 229] <==

==> picture [61 x 20] <==

rms? 

==> picture [154 x 124] <==

==> picture [187 x 184] <==

==> picture [232 x 440] <==

Adding £,, £,, and £, yields Eq. (11). 

214 

A. DIEDERICH 

Derivation of Eq. (14) 

==> picture [500 x 338] <==

For positive random variables, 

, Using the same procedure as for Eq. (11) yields Eq. (14). 

Derivation of Eq. (27) 

Audley, R. J., & Pike, A. R. (1965). Some alternative stochastic models of choice. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 18, 207-255.

Bernstein, I. H., Clark, M. H., & Edelstein, B.H. (1969). Effects of an auditory signal on visual reaction time. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 80, 567-569.

==> picture [230 x 71] <==

Bernstein, I. H., Rose, R., & Ashe, V. M. (1970). Energy integration in intersensory facilitation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 86, 196-203.

Bernstein, I. H., Chu, Ph. K., Briggs, P., & Schurman, D. L. (1973), Stimulus intensity and foreperiod effects in intersensory facilitation. Quartely Journal of Experimental Psychology, 25, 171-181.

Bhat, U. N. (1984). Elements of applied stochastic processes. New York: Wiley.

Setting k=1, N=n,, Q=Q,, multiplyingoo this; left by AZ Bhattachapplictions.applictions. a rya, R. New N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. R. New N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. New N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. York: & Waymire, Wiley. & Waymire, Wiley. Waymire, Wiley. Wiley. E. C, (1990). Stochastic processes with C, (1990). Stochastic processes with Stochastic processes with processes with with and right by R, leads to the first part of the sum in Eq. (27). | Busemeyer, J. R., & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different Setting K=n, +1, N=n,, Q=Q,, multiplying this left by measures of preference: of preference: preference: A dynamic model of matching derived from dynamic model of matching derived from of matching derived from matching derived from derived from from AZ‘, and right by R, leads to the second part of the sum in Cecision fe ineory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision fe ineory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision ineory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Behavior and Human Decision and Human Decision Human Decision Decision Eq. (27). Setting k= no+1, N=, Q= Q;, multiplying Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from R., & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from (1992). Fundamental derivations from Fundamental derivations from derivations from from this by 4Z4, and right by R; leads to the third part of the decision field theory. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. field theory. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. theory. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. Sciences, 23, 155-182. 23, 155-182. 155-182. sum in Eq. (27). Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A T. (1993). Decision field theory: A (1993). Decision field theory: A Decision field theory: A field theory: A theory: A A 

Bhattachapplictions.applictions. a rya, R. New N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. R. New N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. New N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. N., York: & Waymire, Wiley. York: & Waymire, Wiley. & Waymire, Wiley. Waymire, Wiley. Wiley. E. C, (1990). Stochastic processes with C, (1990). Stochastic processes with Stochastic processes with processes with with Eq. (27). | Busemeyer, J. R., & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different (27). | Busemeyer, J. R., & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different | Busemeyer, J. R., & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different Busemeyer, J. R., & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different J. R., & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different R., & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different & Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different Goldstein, W. M. (1992). Linking together different W. M. (1992). Linking together different M. (1992). Linking together different (1992). Linking together different Linking together different together different different measures of preference: of preference: preference: A dynamic model of matching derived from dynamic model of matching derived from of matching derived from matching derived from derived from from Cecision fe ineory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision fe ineory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision ineory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Behavior and Human Decision and Human Decision Human Decision Decision 

Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from R., & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from & Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from Townsend, J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from J. T. (1992). Fundamental derivations from (1992). Fundamental derivations from Fundamental derivations from derivations from from decision field theory. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. field theory. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. theory. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. Social Sciences, 23, 155-182. Sciences, 23, 155-182. 23, 155-182. 155-182.

Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A T. (1993). Decision field theory: A (1993). Decision field theory: A Decision field theory: A field theory: A theory: A A dynamic-cognitive approach to decision making, Psychological Review, 100, 432-459, 

a, 

Derivation of Eq. (28) 

Cinlar, E, (1975). Introduction to stochastic processes. New York:

Prentice—Hall. 

==> picture [190 x 99] <==

Colonius, H. (1986). Measuring channel dependence in separate activation models. Perception & Psychophysics, 40, 251-255. Colonius, H. (1990). Possibly dependent probability summation of reaction time. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 253-275. Cox, D. R., & Miller, H. D. (1977). The theory of stochastic processes. London: Chapman & Hall. 

Cramér, H. (1974). Mathematical methods of statistics. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.

Diederich, A. (1985). Eine experimentelle und theoretische Analyse der intersensorischen Bahnung. Unpublished Diplomarbeit.

INTERSENSORY FACILITATION OF REACTION TIME 

215 

Diederich, A. (1987). Measuring facilitation in the motor component. In E. E, Roskam, & R. Suck (Eds.), Progress in Mathematical Psychology, 1 (pp. 209-217). Amsterdam: North-Holland. 

Miller, J. (1982). Divided attention: Evidence for coactivation with redundant signals. Cognitive Psychology, 14, 247-279. Morrell, L. K. (1967). Intersensory facilitation of reaction time. Psychonomic Science, 8, 77-78. 

Diederich, A. (1992a). Intersensory facilitation: Race, superposition, and diffusion models for reaction time to multiple stimuli (Dissertation). Frankfurt: Verlag Peter Lang. Diederich, A. {1992b). Probability inequalities for testing separate activation models of divided attention. Perception & Psychophysics, 52{6), 714-716. Diederich, A., & Colonius, H. (1987). Intersensory facilitation inthe motor component? A reaction time analysis. Psychological Research, 49, 23-29. 

   Nickerson, R.S. (1973). Intersensory facilitation ofreactiontime: Energy summation or preparation enhancement? Psychological Review, 80, 489-509.

   Pacut, A. (1980). Mathematical modelling of reaction latency: The structure of the models and its motivation. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 40, 199-215.

   Pacut, A. (1982). Mathematical modelling of reaction latency. Part II. A model of escape reaction and escape learning. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 42, 379-395,

Diederich, A., & Colonius, H. (1991). A further test of the superposition model for redundant signals effect in bimodal detection. Perception & Psychophysics, 50, 83-85.

Donders, F. C. (1868). Die Schnelligkeit psychischer Prozesse. Archiv fiir Anatomie und Physiologie, 657-681.

Dunlap, K., & Wells, G. E. (1910). Some experiments with reactions to visual and auditory stimuli, Psychological Review, 17, 319-335.

Pacut, A., & Tych, W. (1982}. Mathematical modelling of reaction latency. Part III. A model of avoidance reaction latency and avoidance learning. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 42, 397-420.

Pike, A. R. (1966). Stochastic models of choice behavior: Response probabilities and latencies of finite Markov chain systems. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 19, 15~32.

Pike, A. R. (1968). Latency and relative frequency of response in psychophysical discrimination. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 21, 161-182.

Edwards, W. (1965). Optimal strategies for seeking information: Modeis for statistics, choice reaction times, and human information processing. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 2, 312-329. Gielen, S.C. A. M., Schmidt, R. A., & van den Heuvel, P. J. M. (1983). On the nature of intersensory facilitation of reaction time. Perception & Psychophysics, 34(2), 161-168. Giray, M., & Ulrich, R. (1994). Motor coactivation revealed by response force in devided and focused attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 19(6), 1278-1291. Green, D. M., & Luce, R. D. (1973). Speed-accuracy trade off in auditory detection. In §. Kornblum (Ed.). Attention and performance, IV (pp. 547-569), New York: Academic Press. Green, D. M., & Luce, R. D. (1974). Timing and counting mechanisms in auditory discrimination and reaction time. In D. H. Krantz, R. C. Atkinson, R. D. Luce, & P. Suppes (Eds.). Contemporary developments in mathematical psychology (Vol. II, pp. 372-415). San Francisco: Freeman. Heath, R.A. (1981). A tandem random walk model for psychological discrimination. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 34, 76-92. Hershenson, M. (1962). Reaction time as a measure of intersensory facilitation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63, 289-293. Horn, R. A., & Johnson, Ch. R. (1990), Matrix analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. Laming, D. R. J. (1968). Information theory of choice-reaction times. London: Academic Press. Link, S. W., & Heath, R. A. (1975). A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika, 40, 77-105. 

   Pike, A. R. (1971). The latencies of correct and incorrect responses in discrimination tasks: Their interpretation in terms of a model based on simple counting. Perception & Psychophysics, 9, 455-460.

   Pike. A. R. (1973). Response latency models for signal detection. Psychological Review, 80, 53-68.

   Raab, D. H. (1962). Statistical facilitation of simple reaction times. Transaction of the New York Academy of Sciences, 24, 574-590.

   Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.

   Ricciardi, L. M. (1977). Lecture notes in biomathematics. Berlin: SpringerVerlag.

   Schwarz, W. {1989). A new model to explain the redundant-signals effect. Perception & Psychophysics, 46(5), 498-500.

   Smith, P. L. (1990). Attention, redundancy, and perceptual integration. Paper presented at the 23rd Annual Mathematical Psychology Meetings, August, University of Toronto, Canada.

   Stone, M. (1960). Models for choice-reaction time. Psychometrika, 25, 251-260.

   Todd, J. W. (1912). Reaction to the multiple stimuli. Archives of Psychology, 25, 1-65.

   Townsend, J. T., & Ashby, F. G. (1983). Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.

   Tuckwell, H. C. (1989). Stochastic processes in neurosciences. Philadelphia: SIAM.

   Ulrich, R., & Giray, M. (1986). Separate-activation models with variable base time: Testabolity and checking of cross-channel dependency. Perception & Psychophysics, 36, 545-558. & Psychophysics, 36, 545-558. Psychophysics, 36, 545-558. 36, 545-558. 545-558.

Luce, R. D. (£986). Response times. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.

Luce, R. D., & Green, D. M. (1972). A neural timing theory for response Perception & Psychophysics, 36, 545-558. & Psychophysics, 36, 545-558. Psychophysics, 36, 545-558. 36, 545-558. 545-558. times and the psychophysics of intensity. Psychological Review, 79, Welch, R. B., & Warren, D. & Warren, D. Warren, D. D. V. (1986). Intersensory interaction. In 14-57, K. R. Boff, L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of R. Boff, L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of Boff, L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of (Eds.), Handbook of Handbook of of[[perception]]

McGill, W, J. (1963). Stochastic latency mechanisms. In R. D. Luce, and human performance (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. human performance (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. performance (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. New York: Wiley. York: Wiley. Wiley. R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds). Handbook ofmathematical psychology | Woodworth, R. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. R. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. H. (1954). Experimental psychology. (1954). Experimental psychology. Experimental psychology. psychology. (Vol 1, pp. 309-360}. New York: Wiley. New York: Holt. York: Holt. Holt.

McGill, W. J. (1967). Neural counting mechanisms and energy detection in audition. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 4, 351-376. Received: May 17, 1993

   Welch, R. B., & Warren, D. & Warren, D. Warren, D. D. V. (1986). Intersensory interaction. In K. R. Boff, L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of R. Boff, L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of Boff, L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of L. Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of Kaufman, & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of & J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of J, P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of (Eds.), Handbook of Handbook of of[[perception]] and human performance (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. human performance (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. performance (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. (Vol. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. 1, pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. pp. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. 25-1-25-35}. New York: Wiley. New York: Wiley. York: Wiley. Wiley.

   Woodworth, R. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. R. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology. H. (1954). Experimental psychology. (1954). Experimental psychology. Experimental psychology. psychology. New York: Holt. York: Holt. Holt.

