10.1006/jmps.1995.1016
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 39, 129-145 (1995) 

On the Study of First Language Acquisition* 

DANIEL OSHERSON 

IDIAP 

AND 

SCOTT WEINSTEIN 

University of Pennsylvania 

We study the discovery problem faced by developmental psycholinguists, namely, to characterize the learning mechanism deployed in first language acquisition. Within our model, the psycholinguist has access to the graph of the function that maps children’s linguistic data to their grammatical hypotheses. They must converge in the limit to an adequate theory of the child, in a weak sense of “adequate.” It is shown that even strong hypotheses about the learning strategy embodied by the child do not suffice to render solvable the psycholinguist’s task. © 1995 Academic Press, Inc. 

TRA 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Human languages are immensely complicated systems for pairing sounds with meanings, yet most infants can acquire any one of them from a few years of sustained, casual contact. However difficult it is to give sharp expression to this phenomenon, few students of language have failed to be impressed by the child’s achievement (for discussion, see (Chomsky, 1975; Chomsky, 1986)). It is thus not surprising that many questions about language acquisition have been posed and investigated, including the following. 

QUESTION 

° 

(1) {a} From among the vast class of logically possible languages, which can in fact be assimilated by children on the basis of the kind of linguistic experience typically afforded the young? That is, which languages are “natural”? 

(b) What is the mental mechanism upon which language acquisition rests? 

oteonasston; ic) raneSS ents. feceneerer ireneaoraor 

. feceneerer ireneaoraor BuUAgeS, mple, OY Y 

* Research support was provided by the Office of Naval Research under Contract N00014-87-K-0401. We thank four generous and insightful referees who read the paper with care. Remaining errors are our respon~ sibility. Correspondence and reprint requests should be sent to Daniel Osherson, DIPSCO, Instituto San Raffaele, Via Olgettina 60, [-20132 Milano, Italy, e-mail: osherson@maya.idiap.ch, or to Scott Weinstein, IRCS, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6228, e-mail: weinstein @cis.upenn.edu. 

specifying a class of grammars rich enough to represent any such language but none others. Question (1b) requests information about the program embodied by the child’s nervous system, the program allowing children to arrive . f th bj at a stable and accurate representation ol the ambient language in case the latter is of the human sort. 

Both questions presuppose familiar idealizations of linguistic competence that have been discussed many times (see, eg., (Piatelli-Palmarini, 1980; Chomsky, 1980)). Rather than reexamine these idealizations, we intend to rely upon them for the purposes of projecting (la, b) into a recursion-theoretic framework. The framework will allow us to represent developmenta! psycholinguistics as a process of theory-discovery within a formally defined paradigm of empirical inquiry. It will then be possible to consider in mathematical terms the prospects for success in this enterprise. The idealizations inherent in our study prevent it from yielding definitive information about the outcome of linguistic research. Nor do the results imply that some particular avenue of empirical inquiry is more promising than others. Rather, our aim is the more modest one of shedding light on a particular aspect of Cognitive Science by examining its scope and limits under simple formal assumptions. 

The ensuing discussion proceeds as follows. The next section reviews the definitions of “language identification from text,” due to Gold (1967). These definitions consitute our model of the child’s discovery problem, which is to acquire a grammar for the ambient language. Section 3 formalizespsycholinguist, the discovery namely, problem to understand faced by how the th child solves d e velopmental his own discovery problem. Section4 is devoted to theorems bearing on the prospects of successful linguistic inquiry. It is shown that even strong assumptions about the child’s learning mechanism do not guarantee that linguists can discover even an approximate description of the child’s t Di . PP f It P ‘es Section 5 COMP ence. MIScussion Of OUT resu S occupies section >. Proofs of theorems and propositions are relegated to the Appendix. 

0022-2496/95 $6.00 Copyright © 1995 by Academic Press, Inc. All nghts of reproduction in any form reserved. 

129 

130 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

2. THE CHILD’S DISCOVERY PROBLEM 

. 

. 

-- Our objective is to analyze the discovery problem faced by developmental psycholinguists. Since the goal of the latter is 10 understand how children confront their own discovery problem, we begin by specifying a model of first language acquisition. For this purpose we rely on the simplest paradigm that preserves essential features of the child’s task, namely, the model introduced by Gold (1967).' 

2.1. Languages and Grammars 

Standard recursion-theoretic notation, as presented in (Rogers, 1987), will be used throughout. The reader may thus imagine that the set N of natural numbers 0, 1,... has been associated with the class of programs written in some familiar programming system. The (graph of the) function computed by the ith program is denoted by g;, and the set of numbers leading it to halt is denoted W,. Such sets are called “recursively enumerable” or “re.” An re. set with re. complement is called “recursive”; its membership can be specified via a mechanical decision procedure. 

We wish to equate languages with subsets of NV. For this purpose we imagine that languages are sets of strings over some suitably nch, universal vocabulary. Such strings might be complex objects, involving distinct levels of representation (semantic, phonetic, etc.), variable binding between levels, bits of pragmatic context, and so forth. It is necessary only to assume that the set of all possible strings can be. mapped to N via a suitably effective isomorphism.2 Relying on generally accepted (albeit vague) theses about the machine simulability of human cogintion, it will be assumed that human languages are recursively enumerable sets. Accordingly, we henceforth reserve the term . “language” for re. subsets of N, that is, for sets of the form ~ W,. The sentences of such a language are represented by the . . natural numbers it contains. 

. It follows from the foregoing that the collection of all " ... possible languages is indexed by the set N of natural "+> “numbers, namely, as >, W,,.... Language W,is associated +: Gwith the ith program, which serves as an accepting device < "for the language since it halts on just the members of W,. of ‘* ‘ ' Course, programs might have special properties that accord ' .* With one‘or, another linguistic theory, ¢.g., consisting of ~ - = sibroutinesthat can be identified as string rewriting rules of a certain form. Programs can thus be conceived as _ “grammars” for their respective languages. 

“. 

,.. By relying on our background indexing of programs, + achildren’s hypotheses about the ambient language will be 

_, 

oer 

a 

’ 'For discussion of the assumptions and idealizations underlying .. Gold’s parattigm, see (Pinker, 1979; Wexler & Culicover, [980; Osherson, 

. 

> : Stob & Weinstein, 1984; Baker, 1979},

‘~"2 For’ general discussion of effective representations of nonnumerical ~~ objects. see (Weihrauch, 1987, Chap. 3.4). 

“os 

identified with the set V of natural numbers. The hypothesis that the ambient language is W, is represented by the number 7. 

2.2. Text and Evidential Positions 

Parents appear to provide little if any direct information about the strings outside of the language to be learned.’ The Gold model represents this fundamental feature of the child’s task by making available to the learner no more than a listing of the sentences in the target language. Linguistic environments of this kind are represented formally as follows. 

By a text for a language L is meant any infinite sequence that lists all and only the members of L; no omissions or extraneous elements are allowed, but repetitions are perjniccible.+ The set of numbers appearing in text 1 is denoted range(t); thus, t is for language L just in case range(t) = L. The jnitial finite sequence in 7 of length n is denoted [7]. fo, example, r= 2, 0, 4, 4, 8, 6, 0, 12... begins a text for the ayen numbers with ‘[3] =2, 0, 4. The set of all initial finite sequences in any text is denoted SEQ. For o¢ SEQ, length(a) is the length of a. 

A member o of SEQ may be conceived as a child’s «evidential position” at moment /ength(c) of his acquisition process. At this time, the child has been exposed to exactly the sentences figuring in a; this set is denoted by range(o). 

° 

2.3. Children as Functions from SEQ to N 

; 

Children are represented by systems that map their current evidential position into a conjecture about the ambient language. We therefore denote by Children the set ©! all (possibly partial) computable functions from SEQ to N. Each such function may be conceived as an hypothesis about the mechanisms involved in human language acquisi"0". . 

To summarize the foregoing notation, let Ce Children, ‘ext #and ne N be given, and suppose that C(¢|7]) =i. This equality is interpreted to mean that after having examined ‘[] much of #, C conjectures that / is a grammar for the #m™bient language range(r). The hypothesis implies that "4"ge(t) = Wi. 

_ o. 

2.4. Criterion of Successful Acquisition 

Within the Gold paradigm, a child is counted as successfully identifying a text t just in case his successive conjectures on ¢ eventually stabilize to a single program that accepts range(r). Formally: 

(2} DEFINITION (Gold, 1967). Let Ce Children and text f¢ be given. 

3 See (Brown & Hanlon, 1970; Hirsh-Pasek, Treiman, & Schneiderman, 1984; Demetras, Post, & Snow, 1986; Penner, 1987). 

* There is no text for @. 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

131 

(a) Cconverges ont toie Njust incase C(t{n])=ifor all but finitely many ne N. 

(b) C identifies t just in case there is ic N such that

i. C converges onf to i, and

il. range(t)= W,,.

{c) C identifies \anguage L just in case C identities every text for L.3 

(d) C C identifies collection 2 of languages just in case identifies every Le #. In this case, # is said to be identifiable. 

Equivalently, C identities just in case for every Le # and every text ¢ for L, C identifies ¢. 

There are infinitely many identifiable collections of languages and infinitely many unidentifiable collections. In addition, many identifiable collections consist of languages for which membership is intrinsically difficult to compute; and many unidentifiable collections consist of languages for which membership is easy to compute (for details, see (Osherson, Stob, & Weinstein, 1986b, Chap. 2, 4)). 

_(3) Derinition. Let Ce Children be given.; The collection of languages that C identifies is denoted scope[C]. For the C,€ Children that corresponds to the human learning function, scope[ Cr] is the class of natural languages—at least, relative to the assumptions and idealizations of the Gold paradigm. 

3. THE LINGUIST’S DISCOVERY PROBLEM 

Let us now consider the discovery problem faced by the developmental psycholinguist. We first specify the data made available about children and then consider some alternative criteria of inferential success. 

3.1. The Data Available to Linguists 

We assume that there is a unique learning function that all norma! children implement for the purposes of language acquisition.° The scientist is offered complete information about the input-output behavior of this function. It is as if it were possible to take a child C, expose C to a linguistic corpus, record the grammar that C emits in response to that corpus, then erase C’s memory, expose it to another corpus, and so forth indefinitely. In this way the linguist also has access to adult grammatical competence, for she can expose C to a long series of sentences in some target language (e.g., 

* Every Ce Children trivially identifies @%, which has no texts. 

® Linguists insist upon the fact that children raised in an ethnic context different from their parents’ learn the ambient language with no discernible delay (see Pinker, 1990)). Such polyvalence suggests that language acquisition is based on mechanisms common to the human spectes and teads to the use of a single learning function to represent children’s linguistic competence. 

English) and examine the grammar C emits in response. Provided that the input series is long enough, C can be assumed to have reached linguistic maturity, and thus its output grammar will be C’s crystalized representation of the target language. 

To proceed formally, we fix some eflective enumeration Jo F1,~ OF SEQ. By the data sequence lor Ce Children is meant the graph of C arranged as the infinite sequence (do, C(Go)), (@,, C(ae,)), ...5 if C is not defined on a; then we replace C(¢,;) by the dummy symbol #. The notation for texts carries over to data sequences. Specifically, given data sequence d the set of pairs appearing in d is denoted range(d), and the initial finite sequence in d of length x is denoted d[1]. 

Observe that the data sequence for Ce Children reaches the linguist in a unique, canonical order; unlike texts for anguages, we do not consider alternative presentations of ©: This is because our paradigm would remain essentially Unchanged if we allowed the pairs of a data sequence to arrive at arbitrary moments; the scientist could simply store and sort his inputs so as to progressively put them back into canonical order. 

The set of finite initial sequences drawn from any data sequence for any Ce Children is denoted SEG. Similarly to s£Q, members of SEG represent evidential positions, this time on the part of a scientist observing a child’s linguistic dispositions. Whereas members of SEQ are samples drawn from a language to be learned by some Ce Children, members of SEG are samples of the behavior of children, to be understood by some linguist. 

It is evident that the linguist is here offered overly generous data, since she is given access at each developmental moment to the child’s current grammar. In fact, such access is highly indirect, and greater realism in this regard renders the linguist’s problem yet more difficult. 

3.2. Linguists as Functions from SEG to N 

The set of hypotheses available to the scientist is represented by N. Depending on the specific criterion of success at issue, such hypotheses will be interpreted either as bearing on the program the child implements or on the class of languages he identifies. 

Any computable function (total or partial) from SEG to WN is called a Jinguist. The set of all linguists is denoted Linguists. Note that linguists, like children, are assumed to be computational agents. 

Suppose that /e Linguists, ie N, and data sequence d are given. We say that / CONDENSES on d to i Just in case (dln ]) = i for all but finitely many ne N (just as for texts). 

3.3. Identification 

oo, 

Our first criterion of success is the standard definition of function identification. 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

132 

(4) DEFINITION (Gold, 1967; Putnam, 1975; Blum and Blum, 1975). Let /e Linguists and Ce Children be given, and letd be the data sequence for C. /identifies Cjustincase / converges on d to an index for C, that is, toie Nsuch that P= C. 

(6) Derinition. Let /e Linguists and Ce Children be given, and let d be the data sequence for C. / weakly delimits C just in case / converges on d to ieN such that scope[g;] > scope[ C]. 

Of course, identification implies delimination, and the latter implies weak delimination. Indeed, this hierarchy is strict, as shown by the following. 

Thus, in the context ofidentification, the linguist’s conjectures are conceived as programs for the child’s learning function. 

. ; is delimitable PROPOSITION. but € is(a) not identifiable.There is 6 s Children such that 

; Definition;; (4) is extended- is extended- extended-tooy collections @enS Children byoy collections @enS Children by collections @enS Children by @enS Children byenS Children byS Children by Children by by ¢ (7) stipulating that / identities @ just in case / identities every Ce. In this case @ is said to be identifiable. In conformity with the technical literature, the term “identifiable” applies both to collections of functions (1.e., children in the present case) and to collections of languages. Context determines which usage is intended. 

Definition;; (4) is extended- is extended- extended-tooy collections @enS Children byoy collections @enS Children by collections @enS Children by @enS Children byenS Children byS Children by Children by by ¢ (7) 

(b) There is @Children such that © is weakly 4¢/!itable but @ is not delimitable. 

(c) Children is not weakly delimitable.

3.5. Characterization 

Identification is a nonvacuous concept in as much as there are interesting classes of children that are identifiable and others that are not (Blum & Blum, 1975). 

; ; oo, ae te tgs Identification and delimitation of a child’s linguistic competence bear on Question (1b), concerining the mental mechanism of language acquisition. Question (la), in contrast, requests a characterization of the class of learnable languages, and such a characterization might be achieved Without specifying a learning mechanism. . One way to specify a collection 2% of languages is to exhibit ieN with the property that # = { Wi \ je W;}. In this case, j represents a program that enumerates indexes for °%4¢tly the members of 2, and Is called indexable. The following criterion, called “characterization,” requires the linguist to discover such a program for the class of learnable /anguages. 

3.4, oo. Delimitation 

Suppose that /e Linguists identifies Ce Children. Then | converges on the data sequence for C to some index i such that g,=C. Hence, scope[y,]=scope[ C]. The latter equality does not imply the former since there are indefinitely many distinct children with the same scope. For example, given néN, two children have the same scope if they agree on all ¢ € SEQ with length(a) =n. We may thus liberalize the criterion of successful research by only requiring convergence to a program with the same scope as the child’s, not necessarily to a program that computes the child’s function. In this case we say that the linguist has “delimited” the child’s competence. 

(8) DEFINITION. Let /e Linguists and Ce Children be given, and let d be the data sequence for C. / characterizes © just in case / converges on d to ieN such that scope C] ={W,|je W,}. 

(5) DEFINITION. Let /e Linguists and Ce Children be given, and let d be the data sequence for C. / delimits C just in case / converges on d to ie€N such that scope p;| = scope[ C]. 

Although Definition (8) provides a natural criterion of linguistic success, it cannot be applied to children whose scope is not indexable. That there might be such children is shown by the following. 

stipulatingThe definition that / is delimits extended @ to just a collection in case / @ delimits © Children every b Ce@. The same kind of extension applies to the remaining criteria. 

(9) PROPOSITION. There is; Ce Children; such that scopelC] #{ W;| Je W,} for every ie N. 

We are thus led to the following, more liberal success 

Delimination of children’s linguistic compentence would _ criterion. be a considerable achievement, serving to dispel some of the mystery surrounding language acquisition. We would at (10) DeFINITION. least dispose of a device that accomplishes just what the be given, given, and let d be the data sequence for C. ! weakly child does, and by examining it we could see how, in principle, such a mechanism might work. Similar insight would that resulttheSince child the om class possessingdoes, even of allif a languagesit program surpassed isaethe not learns child’s identifiable, at compeence. leas t what dis(b)(a) covering such a program is a nontrivial enterprise. The associated success criterion is defined as follows. example, a linguist who uniformly emits a fixed index for NV 

oo, (10) DeFINITION. Let /e Linguists and CeChildren be given, given, and let d be the data sequence for C. ! weakly characterizes C just in case / converges on d to ie[N][ such] that 

(a) scope[C]; <{ Wie_ WS;;

{W,|/e; W,} is_ identifiable.; 

Condition (10b) gives substance to the definition. For example, a linguist who uniformly emits a fixed index for NV 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

133 

weakly characterizes no child, since {W,|jeN} is not identifiable. This condition is already implicit in (8) since the scope of a child is automatically identifiable. 

In contrast to (9), every child C can be weakly characterized, since C’s scope is guaranteed to be a subset of some indexable, identifiable collection of languages. This is the content of the following result. 

(11) PRoposITION (Fulk, 1990). For every Ce Children there is ie N such that 

(a) scope[C] ©{W,| je Wi};

(b) {W,|jeW,} is identifiable.

_ —— ; tion,_ The next proposition separates the criteriaof identificacharacterization, and weak characterization. 

(12) Proposition. (a} There is @ S Children such that @ characterizable but @ is not identifiable. 

(b) There is @ < Children such that

i. for every Ce @, scope[ C] is indexable;

ii. @ is weakly characterizable;

ves

il. @ is not characterizable.

(c) Children is not weakly characterizable.

3.6. Summary 

The preceding sections have defined five criteria of successful developmental psycholinguistics: identification, delimination, characterization, weak delimitation, and weak characterization. 

Propositions (7) and (12) show that the weak and strong versions of delimitation differ from each other and from identification, and similarly for characterization. Proposition (9) suffices to show that identification does not imply characterizability. Information is also available about the relationship between delimitability and characterizability. In particular: 

(13) Proposirion. Suppose that € S Children is weakly delimitable. Then @ is weakly characterizable. 

Regarding the converse to (13), it must not be imagined that an enumerable set of indices for languages can be easily converted into a child that learns those languages. Indeed, such conversion cannot be realized mechanically, even when there are only finite many languages to be learned. This is the content of the following proposition. 

(14) Proposition (Osherson, Stob, & Weinstein, 1988, Prop. 3A). There is no mechanical procedure that takes as input an arbitrary pair i, j of indexes and constructs the program of a child C that identifies { W,, Wh. 

3.7. Preview 

; ; ; 

The following corollary ss an immediate consequence of our definitions and Proposition (13). 

(15) CoroLitary. If @& Children is not weakly characterizable, then in addition it is neither delimitable, weakly delimitable, identifiable, nor characterizable. 

We shall in fact exhibit some highly restricted classes of children that are not weakly characterizable. The bearing of these classes on the methodology of linguistic inquiry can be conceived in the following terms. Suppose that prior research and background knowledge has determined that the child’s function C, falls into some specified class Y < Children. It is desired to translate this knowledge into a research strategy that leads reliably to further insight about C,,. For this purpose, we attempt to find or build a linguist 1 whose scientific method is adapted to the knowledge we have in hand, represented by @. If our goal is to elucidate C,,’s program, for example, we seek a linguist that identifies @. Should it turn out that @ is unidentifiable we reach an impasse. No machine-implementable research strategy is then sufficient for passing reliably from our background knowledge to the discovery of a program for C,. We might by good luck select a linguist that happens to identify C,, but our background knowledge provides no reason for one choice rather than another, hence no compelling reason to accredit the hypotheses of the linguist we choose.’ 

The same considerations apply to more sophisticated Models of linguistic inquiry, for example, those requiring "© More than identification with a given probability (see (Pitt, 1985; Wichagen, Freivald, & Kinber, 1984)). In this case, our background knowledge should lead us to the design ofa linguist with acceptable probability of SUCCESS. If UF knowledge is too limited to sufficiently constrain the Possibilities, we are again faced with arbitrary choices in the 4¢sign of a research strategy and lack of confidence in the theories advanced by our chotce. 

We shall now show that even very strong assumptions about children’s learning strategies do not allow the construction of reliable linguists for either identifying, delimiting, or characterizing the child. In Section 5.2 similar results will be cited for more sophisticated discovery paradigms. 

4. PROSPECTS FOR SUCCESSFUL INQUIRY 

. 

4.1. Strategies 

What kind of information might the linguist bring to bear on her discovery problem, to reduce the space of potential children within which the real one lies? In this section we 

7 For discussion of the role of reliability in the theory of knowledge, see (Goldman, 1986) and references cited therein. 

134 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

focus on the “strategy” employed by the child, for example, on how much of the current data is taken into account at any one time, and on the kind of grammatical hypothesis that is synthesized in response. Six strategies will be defined that might be plausibly attributed to children. It will be seen that even assuming children to implement ai// of them does not ensure the existence of a successful linguist. 

4.1.2. Conservativeness 

. 

Consistency requires the abandonment of falsified grammars. We now consider the converse strategy, namely, the retention of unfalsified ones. Its formulation requires the following notation. Given nonempty a € SEQ, we denote by a— the result of removing the last member of o. (Thus, if o=(3, 4,8), ¢— =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline 4,8), ¢— =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline ¢— =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline For zero-length o, we deline zero-length o, we deline o, we deline we deline deline O76. 

For simplicitly of definition, we shall formulate strong o=(3, 4,8), ¢— =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline 4,8), ¢— =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline ¢— =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline =(3,4)). For zero-length o, we deline For zero-length o, we deline zero-length o, we deline o, we deline we deline deline versions of the strategies at issue; in each case, children O76. are likely to implement only a weaker form. In this sense (18) DeFIniTion (Angluin, 1980). Ce Children is conthe strategies define a background theory that is more — seryative just in case for all ge SEQ, if range(a) W co) restrictive than that imposed by current information about then C(a) = C(o—). the acquisition mechanism (as reviewed, for example, in (Pinker, 1989)). Less restrictive theories have correThus, a conservative learner never abandons a current a conservative learner never abandons a current learner never abandons a current never abandons a current abandons a current a current spondingly less chance of circumscribing a collection of conjecture that generates all the available data. In fact, there that generates all the available data. In fact, there generates all the available data. In fact, there all the available data. In fact, there the available data. In fact, there available data. In fact, there data. In fact, there In fact, there fact, there there potential children that can be reliably identified, delimited, is evidence that children exhibit nonconservative theory evidence that children exhibit nonconservative theory that children exhibit nonconservative theory children exhibit nonconservative theory exhibit nonconservative theory nonconservative theory theory or characterized. change (see Mazurkewich & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). (see Mazurkewich & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). Mazurkewich & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). 1984; Pinker, 1986)). Pinker, 1986)). 1986)). 

Thus, a conservative learner never abandons a current a conservative learner never abandons a current learner never abandons a current never abandons a current abandons a current a current conjecture that generates all the available data. In fact, there that generates all the available data. In fact, there generates all the available data. In fact, there all the available data. In fact, there the available data. In fact, there available data. In fact, there data. In fact, there In fact, there fact, there there is evidence that children exhibit nonconservative theory evidence that children exhibit nonconservative theory that children exhibit nonconservative theory children exhibit nonconservative theory exhibit nonconservative theory nonconservative theory theory change (see Mazurkewich & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). (see Mazurkewich & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). Mazurkewich & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). & White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). White, 1984; Pinker, 1986)). 1984; Pinker, 1986)). Pinker, 1986)). 1986)). However, such behavior must eventually give way to a less capricious policy, and there is evidence that children choose “small” languages so as to facilitate conservatism (see 

ALL. Consistency 

A fundamental question for psycholinguistic research is an the case of consisteney conservatism restricts both 

the manner in which linguistic data influence the succession of grammars that children synthesize in the course of language acquisition (see (Borer & Wexler, 1987; Villiers, Roeper, & Vainikka, 1990; Hsu, Cairns, & Fiengo, 1985)). A basic role of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm basic role of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm role of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm sentences is no doubt to disconfirm is no doubt to disconfirm no doubt to disconfirm doubt to disconfirm to disconfirm disconfirm — tifiable collections of languages that cannot be identified by collections of languages that cannot be identified by of languages that cannot be identified by languages that cannot be identified by that cannot be identified by cannot be identified by be identified by identified by by grammars that cannot generate them. Although children are unlikely to abandon a grammar simply because it 1s incompatible with current linguistic evidence (since otherwise hypotheses would have to be changed almost every hour), it may be plausibly assumed that they can eventually be dislodged from any hypothesis that is sufficientiy disconfirmed. A strong form of such sensitivity to data is defined as follows.° 

the child’s behavior and the class of languages he can identify 

(19) Proposition (Angluin, 1980). There are identifiable collections of languages that cannot be identified by collections of languages that cannot be identified by of languages that cannot be identified by languages that cannot be identified by that cannot be identified by cannot be identified by be identified by identified by by any conservative child. 

A basic role of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm basic role of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm role of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm of input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm input sentences is no doubt to disconfirm sentences is no doubt to disconfirm is no doubt to disconfirm no doubt to disconfirm doubt to disconfirm to disconfirm disconfirm — tifiable collections of languages that cannot be identified by collections of languages that cannot be identified by of languages that cannot be identified by languages that cannot be identified by that cannot be identified by cannot be identified by be identified by identified by by 

It may also be shown that conservatism and consistency impose distinct restrictions on identifiability (see (Osherson © al., 1986b, Sect. 4.5.1)). 

4.1.3. Memory-Limitation 

There can be little doubt that children retain few of the sentences presented to them. Once processed, sentences likely disappear from the child’s memory. To formulate a corresponding strategy, we rely on the following notation. Given nonempty o € SEQ, the last member of o is denoted g,,.,. For zero length o we define Oi, =<. 

(16) DEFINITION (Wiehagen, 1978). CeChildren is consistent just in case for all o ¢ SEQ, range(a) © Weq). 

Thus, consistency requires the current hypothesis to generate (at least) the current data. Note that consistent children must be total, i.e., defined on every input. 

Consistency is a restrictive hypothesis in the sense that it narrows the class of potential children that a linguist might confront. It is also restrictive in the sense of limiting the kinds of languages that the child can learn. For example: 

(20) DeFinirion (Wexler & Culicover, 1980). Let © € Children be given. C is memory limited just in case for ll o,teSEQ, if Ca—)=C(t—) and ys = Tas then C(a) = C(t). 

(17) Proposition (Osherson et al, 1986b, Prop. 433A). Let consistent Ce Children identity & Then every Le is recursive. 

Intuitively, a child is memory-limited just in case his UtTent conjecture depends on no more than (a) his last conjecture and (b) the current datum. In addition to being a highly restrictive feature of a child’s behavior, it limits What can be identified. 

In contrast, unrestricted children can identity nonrecursive: languages. 8 

(21) Proposition (Osherson er al., 1986b, Prop. 4.4.1 B). There are identifiable collections of languages that cannot be identified by any memory-limited child. 

® See (Fulk, 1988; Angluin, 1980) for discussion of consistency and related strategies. 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

135 

4.1.4. Prudence 

Call a grammar “natural” if there is some kind of linguistic evidence that would lead a normal child to formulate the grammar as his current linguistic hypothesis. One form of nativism, formulated in (Chomsky, 1965), holds that the natural grammars coincide with the humanly possible languages in the following sense: a language is humanly possible (ie., learnable by children in the normal way) just in case there is a natural grammar that generates it. In one direction this thesis is evident; children cannot learn a language for which they do not possess a grammar. The other direction is more trenchant. It says that children’s hypotheses are limited to grammars for languages which they can in fact learn. The thesis is thus false if in the course of language acquisition children sometimes advance grammars for languages which could not be learned if actually presented to them. 

Potential children who conform to this thesis are called “prudent” in the theory of machine inductive inference. They may be formally defined as follows. 

(22) 1982). DEFINITIONLet Ce Children(Osherson, be given. CStob, is prudent & justWeinstein, in case scope | C| = { W,|for some o ¢ SEQ, C(o) =i}. 

The impact of prudence on the class of identifiable languages is revealed by the following proposition. 

(23) PROPOSITION. (a) (Osherson et al, 1986b, Sect. 7.3.1) There 1s Ce Children such that for every prudent Ce Children, seope [C] # scope [C’]. 

(b) (Fulk, 1990) For every identifiable collection ¥ of languages there is prudent C € Children with & <scope[C]. 

Thus, ae . can identify, prudence IMPOses but it does restrict TO restriction the collections on what of languages children that can be identified “exactly,” ie., with no additional languages added. 

4.1.5. Decisiveness 

It might turn out that children are reluctant to synthesize the same grammar twice, returning to an abandoned conjecture after having adopted another in the interim. The following strategy represents a strong form of this behavior, since it rules out returning even to the same language conjectured at an earlier stage of learning. 

(24) just in caseDeFINITION. for all oe SEQ,Let Ce if Children Wo, beA Weo_) given. then Cis there decisive is 

no te SEQ that extends ¢ with Wa,,)= We,_). 

It is not known whether decisiveness limits the identifiable collections of languages. (For discussion, see (Fulk, et al., 1992, Sect. 5).) 

4.1.6. Boundedness 

In Section 2.1 the class of potential languages was assimilated to the collection of all re. sets. It follows that there are nonrecursive languages and that even among the Tecursive languages there is no bound on the complexity of the decision procedure needed to decide membership (see (Machtey & Young, 1978}). In contrast, human languages may well be recursive and relatively easily decidable (if only the program were known!). To represent this conjecture formally, we presuppose the existence ofa standard measure Of the running time of programs ((Blum, 1967); see (Machtey & Young, 1978)). Given total recursive function 4: N— N we say that index n “operates in A-time” just in case for all xeN, @,(x) is defined within A(x) steps of Computation. 

(25) Derinirion. Let Ce Children and total recursive function h: N— N be given. C is /-bounded just in case for anges EQ, 0 cq) operates in h-time. 

Thus, C is h-bounded if his conjectures are limited to programs that decide the grammaticality of a sentence s withinchild C, A(s) scope[ many C] steps. is limited It follows to recursive that for languages an A-bounded with decision procedures that operate in h-time. Boundedness thus restricts both the child’s behavior and the class of langauges he can identify. 

4.2. The Nonexistence of Reliable Linguists: Part I 

Consider the collection of all Ce Children that conform to the six strategies defined above, namely, consistency, conservativeness, memory-limitation, prudence, decisiveness, and boundedness. The following theorem shows that even if the class of potential children is limited to this narrow class, weak characterization cannot be reliably achieved. 

(26) THEOREM. There is a collection @ < Children with the following properties. 

(a) Each Ce@ is consistent, conservative, memorylimited, prudent, and decisive. 

(b) There is total recursive h: N- N such that each Ce @ is h-bounded. 

(c) @ is not weakly characterizable. 

It follows immediately that: 

(27) Corottary. No superset of © in the foregoing theorem (for example the class of children who satisfy some subsetdelimitable, ofthe characterizabie, six strategies) is or identifiable, weakly characterizable. delimitable, weakly 

Observe that clause (b) of Theorem (26) is stronger than the statement that each Ce @ is h-bounded for some A. In the latter case, the functions A might differ for different members of @. In contrast, as formulated above, there is a 

136 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

single A that bounds the complexity of all the languages conjectured by any of the children in @. 

4.3. The Nonexistence of Reliable Linguists: Part I 

Using linguistic evidence, Chomsky (1981, 1986) has defended the thesis that the class of natural languages is finite, and a learning-theoretical argument for the same conclusion is advanced in (Osherson, Stob & Weinstein 1984) (see also (Wexler, 1982)). Such a strong assumption about the scope of the language acquisition mechanism might be expected to render the linguist’s task feasible, since it drastically reduces the space of potential children. The following theorem shows, however, that not even the kind of “strong nativism” defended by Chomsky implies the existence of reliable linguists. 

(28) THEOREM. Let @ be the collection of Children that identify fewer than three nonempty languages. Then € is not weakly characterizable. 

As an immediately consequence, we have: 

(29) CoroLLary. The collection of children whose scope is finite is not identifiable, delimitable, weakly delimitable, characterizable, or weakly characterizable. 

5. DISCUSSION 

5.1. Summary 

Theorems (26) and (28) rest upon two layers of modelbuilding and abstraction. The first provides a formal description of the child’s discovery problem, which is to synthesize a grammar for the ambient language. We have here relied on Gold’s paradigm of language identification from text because it is well known, simple, yet empirically faithful to essential aspects of the child’s task. The second layer describes the linguist’s discovery problem, which is to elucidate the child’s language acquisition mechanism. Five models of the linguist’sae task were advanced, the least stringent being weak characterization. 

Within this formal setting it is possible to pose mathematical questions of the form: 

(30) Does there exist a linguist that can weakly characterize any child drawn arbitrarily from collection ¢? 

The question takes on special significance when ¢ is included in the class of potential children consistent with our current knowledge about language acquisition. In that case, a negative answer suggests the absence of reliable means for reaching an explanatory theory of linguistic development. outcome In addition to fostering pessimism about the means threatensof psycholinguistic research, to undermine our confidence the absence in whatever of such theories are put forth by linguists, be they true or false. 

In fact, our results give reason to believe that considerable background knowledge is necessary for the existence of a reliable method of psycholinguistic research. Theorem (26) shows that strong hypotheses about the Strategy embodied by children may not suffice for this purP°S¢. Theorem (28) makes the same point for hypotheses about the scope of children’s competence. 

It ts clear, however, that such conclusions are no more credible than the assumptions and idealizations inherent in the framework developed in Sections 2 and 3. We are thus !¢4 to consider the robustness of Theorems (26) and (28), 1+ the extent to which they survive new empirical assump"0S and modifications of paradigm. After examining this ™atter we return to the methodological morals, if any, to be drawn from our investigation. 

5,2. Variations in Paradigm and Assumptions 

. _ 

The definitions and empirical assumptions underlying our framework can be modified in several ways without changing the essential content of Theorems (26) and (28). We provide some examples. 

5.2.1. Exclusion of Finite_ Languages 

Recursive, syntatical mechanisms seem to be available in every language that children can master (see Sankoff & Brown, 1976; Bickerton, 1981) for evidence from pidgins), so it may well be that no finite language is natural. It is thus relevant that our theorems can be reformulated as follows. 

; ; 

; 

th (31} THEOREM. inere is @ collection @< Children with e following properties. 

(a) For every Ce, there are no finite languages in —scope[ C].9 

(b) Each Ce@ is consistent, conservative, memorylimited, prudent, and decisive. (c) Th s total rsive hi NN such that each cP A mere ts toldt recursive Nh ae 

Ce@ is h-bounded. 

(d) © is not weakly characterizable. 

(32) THEOREM. Let @ be the collection of children that identify fewer than three nonempty languages, none of them finite. Then @ is not weakly characterizable. 

5.2.2. Other Numbers of Natural Languages 

Since there are evidently more than two natural languages, it is important that Theorem (28) does not rest upon the particular bound appearing there. In fact, we have: 

(33) THEOREM. LetneéWN be given, and let@ be the collection of children that identify between n and n-+2 languages. none of them finite. Then @ is not weakly characterizable. 

Except for @, which is left in for convenience. 

; 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

137 

§.2.3. Rapid Acquisition 

have been defined and investigated.!? We limit ourselves to one example.P 

Gold’s identification criterion. ; ; ok places no limit. on the number of sentences that the child may examine before convergence begins. In contrast, normal language acquistion is_ strikingly rapid, perhaps because it must take place during a short lived: SO“eriticalneadi period.”. 21dficient: use of cata 5: 2 Netopic Es( Ssfeoh eet, 19 Has36) 1.4 a he istlcans, ee Vatiana ran 08. 9. ary mit , ) and re erences cited ercin). However, a simple approach may be outlined here, based on ideas found in (Gold, 1967). 

(37) DeFmnirion. (a) Let languages L, L’ be given. L is a finite variant of L' just in case (L—L')U(L'—L) is finite. 

(b) (Case & Lynes, 1982) Let Ce Children and collecincasetion # of thelanguages be following is given. true for Cis every said to text FD-identif ¢ for ever y & justLe Y. For all but finitely many ne N, C(t[n]) is an index for a finite variant of L 

(34) Dermrtion. Let C, Dé Children be given. We say that D is. strictly; faster than C juster in case the following conditions hold 

,__1hUS: FD-identification requires only that C reacts to its input by eventually; emittingon an unbroken3 series of conjectures none of which are infinitely wrong. . 

, 

Let scope,,[C] be the class of languages that C FD-identifies. / € Linguists is said to weakly FD-characterize C just in SAS¢ i converges on the data sequence for C to ic[N][ such] that 

{a) scope[D] 2 scope[ C]; 

(b) for every text ¢ for every Le scope[ C}, D begins to converge on f no later than C begins to converge on 1," 

{c) for some text ¢ for some Lescope[C], D begins to converge on ¢ sooner than C does. 

(a) scope, C] 5 {W,|je W;; 

(b) {W,ljeW;} is FD-identifiable.

Thus, D is strictly faster than C if it identifies everything that C does, never reaches a stable theory for a language in scope[C] later than C does, and sometimes reaches such a theory earlier. A child for whom there exists no strictly faster competitor makes efficient use of data in a clear sense. 

We have the following versions of our results. 

(38) THEorEM. There is a collection @ € Children with the following properties. 

(35) Derinition. Let Ce Children be given. C is text‘ent just in case there is no De Children such that D is ety cet,[or][ than][ C][ ere] no ° , 

Jimited,(a) prudent,Each Ce@ and is decisive. consistent, conservative, memory- 

(b) There is a total recursive h: N~» N such that each Ce is h-bounded. 

Theorem (26) holds even if attention is limited to textefficient children. 

(c) @ is not weakly FD-characterizable. 

(36)[THreorem.] There is a collection @ S Children with he followi hi following properties. 

> ( 39). ) THEOREM.. Lete © be thee collecticollection of hildrenchildren that. FD-identify fewer than three nonempty languages. Then © is not FD-weakly characterizable.

the 

(a) Every Ce@ is text-efficient. 

(b}) Each Ce@ is consistent, conservative, memory5.2.5. Probabilistic Identification by Linguists limited, prudent, and decisive. _ oo, . 

(c) P Cé There is total recursive hi N—-N such that each © is h-bounded. 

Instead of requiring the linguist to succeed with perfect reliability, it might be enough if she succeeded only with sufficiently high probability. Let us thus conceive oflinguists[ as] taking an additional input consisting of a growing sequence of randomly generated, fair coin tosses. The linguist’s response to ae SEG may then depend upon the outcome of the coin, and success may require a fortunate sequence of tosses. This idea has been formalized and investigated in (Wiehagen er a/., 1984; Pitt, 1985). Without pausing for exact definitions of the relevant concepts, we may state the following direct corollaries to their results. 

(d) is not weakly characterizable. 

5.2.4. More Liberal Criteria of Language Identification 

The Gold model represents the child as conforming toa rigorous standard of language learning. Not only must the child reach a completely stable conjecture, the latter must also coincide exactly with the ambient language. To liberalize the Gold criterion, a wide variety of paradigms 

'2 As in (Smith, 1979; Case & Smith, 1983; Osherson & Weinstein, 1982a; Osherson & Weinstein, 1982b; Royer, 1986; Angluin & Smith, 1983; Fulk & Jain, 1994}. 

'0 See (Johnson & Newport, 1989; Newport & Supalla, 1989). '! That is, the cardinality of {fe NIFj> (CLI)¥ CLF} is atleast as great as the cardinality of {ie N|3/> (D([/})) # DLJ ])}. 

'3 The expression “FD” stands for “finite difference.” 

138 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

(40) THEOREM. There is a collection @ & Children with the following properties. 

yet more clearly by representing the strategies and limitations under which the linguist herself works. For example, the prospects for finding a reliable methodology dwindle further if linguists have bounded memory, if their data are noisy or incomplete, if they must begin to converge rapidly, etc, Furthermore, it will be recalled from subsection 3.1 that the paradigms defined in Section 3 offer the linguist highly purified data. The tumult of children’s genuine speech and understanding can only complicate the linguist’s task. 

(a) Each Ce@ is consistent, conservative, memorylimited, prudent, and decisive , , (b) , ° _ Ce There is a total recursive h: NN such that each @ is h-bounded. 

(c) There is no le Linguists that identifies each CE@ with probability greater than 50%. 

(41) THeorem. Let @ be the collection of children that identify fewer than three nonempty languages. Then there is no le Linguistsaan that identifiesae each Ce @ with. probabilityoy: greater than 50% 

on the one hand, nt have already cxphasize he Pro al ane’ Speculative character © toma framework that underlies. our discussion.we There remainswas a vast space of alternative definitions and hypotheses within which more encouraging paradigms might be found. Such paradigms would represent available information about language acquisition, yet imply the existence of reliable methods of linguistic research. Many senses of “reliable” can be defined and investigated in this context, including senses that require only approximately correct theories whose discovery is merely probable, not certain as proposed in (Valiant, 1984; Blumer, Ehrenfeucht, Haussler, & Haussler, &ussler, & & Warmuth, 1986)). An entry to the extensive literature on 1986)). An entry to the extensive literature on An entry to the extensive literature on entry to the extensive literature on to the extensive literature on the extensive literature on extensive literature onnsive literature on literature on on alternative discovery paradigms is provided by (Haussler discovery paradigms is provided by (Haussler paradigms is provided by (Haussler is provided by (Haussler provided by (Haussler by (Haussler (Haussler[[&]] 

Thus, reliable identification in the sense of high probability cannot be achieved for the classes of children mentioned in the theorems. (It is not known whether the same is true for weak characterization.) 

5.2.6. More Realistic Data for Language Acquisition 

It appears that children receive largely accurate data (Valiant, 1984; Blumer, Ehrenfeucht, Haussler, & Haussler, &ussler, & & about the ambient language since mothers’ speech to Warmuth, 1986)). An entry to the extensive literature on 1986)). An entry to the extensive literature on An entry to the extensive literature on entry to the extensive literature on to the extensive literature on the extensive literature on extensive literature onnsive literature on literature on on children contains few grammatical errors (Newport alternative discovery paradigms is provided by (Haussler discovery paradigms is provided by (Haussler paradigms is provided by (Haussler is provided by (Haussler provided by (Haussler by (Haussler (Haussler[[&]] Gleitman, & Gleitman, 1977). A certain amount of “noise” cub 1990) Haussler, & Warmuth, 1989; Fulk & is nonetheless inevitable, as is the omission of a subset of N Ww di Ww di di ies about the | ; tratesi bodied grammatical sentences. It is likely, as well, that children do b an  hildren ons bo . the data wath " whe, an  hildren ons bo . the data wath " whe,  hildren ons bo . the data wath " whe, ons bo . the data wath " whe, bo . the data wath " whe, . the data wath " whe, the data wath " whe, data wath " whe, wath " whe, " whe, whe, not face a completely arbitrary order of input sentences, y young ¢ young ¢ ¢ avon’ ata avanagle to mem . ; ae may also serve to render reliable discovery possible. For also serve to render reliable discovery possible. For serve to render reliable discovery possible. For to render reliable discovery possible. For render reliable discovery possible. For reliable discovery possible. For discovery possible. For possible. For For since caretakers often speak to children in a distinctive, . . mon : simplified manner ((Snow & Ferguson, 1977); but see also example, grammatical analysis of existing languages might grammatical analysis of existing languages might analysis of existing languages might of existing languages might existing languages might languages might might (Pinker, 1990)). Sentence order might also be partly provide a secure basis for postulating constraints on the a secure basis for postulating constraints on the secure basis for postulating constraints on the basis for postulating constraints on the for postulating constraints on the postulating constraints on the constraints on the on the the governed by stochastic mechanisms hich is known to form of grammars that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & of grammars that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & grammars that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & children synthesize (as in (Pierce & synthesize (as in (Pierce & (as in (Pierce & in (Pierce & (Pierce & & simplify, in principle, the identification of languages Deprez, 1990; Frank, 1992), and such constraints might be 1990; Frank, 1992), and such constraints might be Frank, 1992), and such constraints might be 1992), and such constraints might be and such constraints might be such constraints might be constraints might be might be be ((Osherson, Stob, & Weinstein, 1986a; Angluin, 1988)) sufficient for reliable identification. Information about the for reliable identification. Information about the reliable identification. Information about the identification. Information about the Information about the about the the ; Finally, ° —— , > Angin, 178°)" time children use to translate linguistic data into gramma- children use to translate linguistic data into gramma- use to translate linguistic data into gramma- to translate linguistic data into gramma- linguistic data into gramma- data into gramma- into gramma- grammawe note that if sentences are conceived as the richly tical hypotheses is anoth hypotheses is anoth is anoth anoth otential means of means of obtaini structured objects described in subsection 2.1, then children vsliability, To see what To see what see what what P ne fa deine Mm ne fa deine Mm fa deine Mm deine Mm Mm ting” “ “ have access only to fragments of them, primarily, to their y a _ sue, sue, © ° phonetic realizationee and, via; context, to aspects of their. @€SEQarar to be. be.. the number; number;; of digits and commas. digits and commas. and commas. commas.. needed to to ; . ; write it. Given Ce Children and total recursive h: it. Given Ce Children and total recursive h: Given Ce Children and total recursive h: Ce Children and total recursive h: Children and total recursive h: and total recursive h: total recursive h: recursive h: h: N- N. N. semantics (as discussed in (Wexler & Culicover, 1980)). oe . ” A variety of modifications of; ; the Gold model can be envi-. all C; C;; A-fast just; just;; in case for. case for. for.. all ae SEQ, C(a)° SEQ, C(a)° C(a)°° is defined in defined in in . h(size(o)) units of time, units of time, of time, time, if defined at defined at at all. We have the We have the have the the sioned to represent these facts (see {Osherson et a/., 1986b; followin Fulk e¢ al., 1992) for preliminary results). Without going e into details here, we note that relevant versions of Theorems (42) ProposiTiIon. ProposiTiIon. Let total recursive h: N>N be (26) and (28) can be proved within these alternative given, and let @< Children be the collection of all h-fast and let @< Children be the collection of all h-fast let @< Children be the collection of all h-fast @< Children be the collection of all h-fast Children be the collection of all h-fast be the collection of all h-fast the collection of all h-fast collection of all h-fast of all h-fast all h-fast h-fast paradigms. In particular, the idea of restricting children’s children. Then @ is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly Then @ is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly @ is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly (hence delimitable and weakly delimitable and weakly and weakly weakly data to sentence fragments can be formalized in a wide characterizable). variety Ol ways, our theorems survive Of course, empirically documenting such a recursive course, empirically documenting such a recursive documenting such a recursive such a recursive a recursive recursive 

N Ww di Ww di di ies about the | ; tratesi bodied b an  hildren ons bo . the data wath " whe, an  hildren ons bo . the data wath " whe,  hildren ons bo . the data wath " whe, ons bo . the data wath " whe, bo . the data wath " whe, . the data wath " whe, the data wath " whe, data wath " whe, wath " whe, " whe, whe, y young ¢ young ¢ ¢ avon’ ata avanagle to mem may also serve to render reliable discovery possible. For also serve to render reliable discovery possible. For serve to render reliable discovery possible. For to render reliable discovery possible. For render reliable discovery possible. For reliable discovery possible. For discovery possible. For possible. For For . . mon : example, grammatical analysis of existing languages might grammatical analysis of existing languages might analysis of existing languages might of existing languages might existing languages might languages might might provide a secure basis for postulating constraints on the a secure basis for postulating constraints on the secure basis for postulating constraints on the basis for postulating constraints on the for postulating constraints on the postulating constraints on the constraints on the on the the form of grammars that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & of grammars that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & grammars that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & that children synthesize (as in (Pierce & children synthesize (as in (Pierce & synthesize (as in (Pierce & (as in (Pierce & in (Pierce & (Pierce & & Deprez, 1990; Frank, 1992), and such constraints might be 1990; Frank, 1992), and such constraints might be Frank, 1992), and such constraints might be 1992), and such constraints might be and such constraints might be such constraints might be constraints might be might be be sufficient for reliable identification. Information about the for reliable identification. Information about the reliable identification. Information about the identification. Information about the Information about the about the the time children use to translate linguistic data into gramma- children use to translate linguistic data into gramma- use to translate linguistic data into gramma- to translate linguistic data into gramma- linguistic data into gramma- data into gramma- into gramma- grammatical hypotheses is anoth hypotheses is anoth is anoth anoth otential means of means of obtaini vsliability, To see what To see what see what what P ne fa deine Mm ne fa deine Mm fa deine Mm deine Mm Mm ting” “ “ y a _ sue, sue, © ° @€SEQarar to be. be.. the number; number;; of digits and commas. digits and commas. and commas. commas.. needed to to write it. Given Ce Children and total recursive h: it. Given Ce Children and total recursive h: Given Ce Children and total recursive h: Ce Children and total recursive h: Children and total recursive h: and total recursive h: total recursive h: recursive h: h: N- N. N. oe . ” all C; C;; A-fast just; just;; in case for. case for. for.. all ae SEQ, C(a)° SEQ, C(a)° C(a)°° is defined in defined in in h(size(o)) units of time, units of time, of time, time, if defined at defined at at all. We have the We have the have the the followin 

(42) ProposiTiIon. ProposiTiIon. Let total recursive h: N>N be given, and let @< Children be the collection of all h-fast and let @< Children be the collection of all h-fast let @< Children be the collection of all h-fast @< Children be the collection of all h-fast Children be the collection of all h-fast be the collection of all h-fast the collection of all h-fast collection of all h-fast of all h-fast all h-fast h-fast children. Then @ is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly Then @ is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly @ is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly is identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly identifiable (hence delimitable and weakly (hence delimitable and weakly delimitable and weakly and weakly weakly characterizable). Of course, empirically documenting such a recursive course, empirically documenting such a recursive documenting such a recursive such a recursive a recursive recursive bound / is likely to be a difficult task, especially given the likelshood of individual differences in this regard. Furthermore, it is not guaranteed that there even is a recursive bound on the time children require to react to input. Proposition (42) nonetheless illustrates the potentia! impact of processing information on questions about reliable method. 

5.3. “Let: . The Possibility of More Favorable Paradigms 

The foregoing results suggest that Theorems (26) and (28) are not the brittle consequences of crafted definitions. Rather, they provide a formal reflection—partial, to be sure—of the nontriviality of the linguist’s discovery problem. Indeed, the amplitude of this problem can be seen 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

139 

5.4. Concluding Remarks 

(b) Let Ce Children and De Tot-Chil be given. C is to paar just in case for all ie N, Clai)= paar just in case for all ie N, Clai)= just in case for all ie N, Clai)= in case for all ie N, Clai)= case for all ie N, Clai)= for all ie N, Clai)= all ie N, Clai)= ie N, Clai)= N, Clai)= Clai)= pad\range(o,), D(F(range(o;)))). 

Theorems (26) and (28) are not intended to nourish any a to paar just in case for all ie N, Clai)= paar just in case for all ie N, Clai)= just in case for all ie N, Clai)= in case for all ie N, Clai)= case for all ie N, Clai)= for all ie N, Clai)= all ie N, Clai)= ie N, Clai)= N, Clai)= Clai)= skeptical thesis about linguistic science. They merely pad\range(o,), D(F(range(o;)))). highlight the difficulty of specifying empirically plausible Thus, if C represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via if C represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via C represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via D, then C’s graph encodes (via C’s graph encodes (via graph encodes (via encodes (via (via F hypotheses that guarantee the possibility of successful and pad) that of D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are that of D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are of D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are At the same time, C’s conjectures are the same time, C’s conjectures are same time, C’s conjectures are time, C’s conjectures are C’s conjectures are conjectures are are inquiry into language acquisition. In particular, the limited to indices for members of FIN and depend only on to indices for members of FIN and depend only on indices for members of FIN and depend only on for members of FIN and depend only on members of FIN and depend only on of FIN and depend only on FIN and depend only on and depend only on depend only on only on on theorems suggest the insufficiency in this regard of the range of the input sequence. range of the input sequence. of the input sequence. the input sequence. input sequence. sequence. hypotheses based solely on children’s learning strategies or ; on the number of learnable languages. An alternative source (48) Lemma. Lemma. (a) For every DeTot-Chil there of hypotheses comes from comparative grammar, ie., the exactly one C€ Children that represents D. one C€ Children that represents D. C€ Children that represents D. Children that represents D. that represents D. represents D. D. study of grammatical variation across natural languages (b) There is total recursive H: total recursive H: recursive H: H: NN such that for such that for that for for (see (van Riemskijk & Williams, 1986)). If comparative all ieN, if C;¢ Children ieN, if C;¢ ChildrenN, if C;¢ Children if C;¢ Children C;¢ Children Children represents De Tot-Chil, Tot-Chil, then grammar can secure nontrivial constraints on the kinds of Ci;) =D. =D. languages assimilable by children, it may be possible to (49) Dermrtion. Dermrtion. The collection {Ce Children|C Children|C prove the existence of reliable research methods in developPer mental psycholinguistics.arn Recent studies,in language represents some D € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P some D € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P D € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P is denoted @,.,.P denoted @,.,.P @,.,.PP acquisition indicate the promise of such an enterprise (e.g., (50) Lemma. For every CE G;,, scope[ C] = FIN. (Borer & Wexler, 1987; Gibson & Wexler, 1994; Wexler & Manzini, 1987; Niyogi & Berwick, 1994; Pierce, 1992)). (51) LEMMA. @,., is delimitable. 

Thus, if C represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via if C represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via C represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via represents D, then C’s graph encodes (via D, then C’s graph encodes (via C’s graph encodes (via graph encodes (via encodes (via (via F and pad) that of D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are that of D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are of D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are D. At the same time, C’s conjectures are At the same time, C’s conjectures are the same time, C’s conjectures are same time, C’s conjectures are time, C’s conjectures are C’s conjectures are conjectures are are limited to indices for members of FIN and depend only on to indices for members of FIN and depend only on indices for members of FIN and depend only on for members of FIN and depend only on members of FIN and depend only on of FIN and depend only on FIN and depend only on and depend only on depend only on only on on the range of the input sequence. range of the input sequence. of the input sequence. the input sequence. input sequence. sequence. 

; (48) Lemma. Lemma. (a) For every DeTot-Chil there is exactly one C€ Children that represents D. one C€ Children that represents D. C€ Children that represents D. Children that represents D. that represents D. represents D. D. 

(b) There is total recursive H: total recursive H: recursive H: H: NN such that for such that for that for for all ieN, if C;¢ Children ieN, if C;¢ ChildrenN, if C;¢ Children if C;¢ Children C;¢ Children Children represents De Tot-Chil, Tot-Chil, then Ci;) =D. =D. 

(49) Dermrtion. Dermrtion. The collection {Ce Children|C Children|C Per represents some D € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P some D € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P D € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P € Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P Tot-Chil} is denoted @,.,.P is denoted @,.,.P denoted @,.,.P @,.,.PP 

Proof. Let ig be an index for a child that identifies FIN. (It is easy to see that such an iy exists.) Let /e Linguists be the constant /, function. Then by (50), /delimits ¢,,. [J 

APPENDIX: PROOFS OF PROPOSITIONS AND THEOREMS 

Recall the fixed recursive enumeration of SEQ established in Subsection 3.1. It induces an ordering C, on Children by identifying g, with the child that maps a, into @,(n), for all ne N. We rely on this indexing of children in what follows. 

(52) Lemma. There is total computable P: SEG > SEG With the[following][ property.][ Let][ D][ €][ Tot-Chil][ be][ given,][ and][ let] @ 2¢ the data sequence for D. Then \); P(d[i]) is the data Sequence for the Ce ©... that represents D. 

Proof of Proposition (7) 

(53) LEMMA. @,, is not identifiable. 

. 

Proof. Suppose that /e Linguists identifies €,,. Then it is easy to verify that y = HoloPe Linguists identifies TotChil. Intuitively, P converts the incoming data sequence d for De Tot-Chil into a data sequence c for a child C that represents D; / converges on ¢ to an index for C, which is Converted by H into an index for D, thereby identifying the latter. However, the existence of such a yw contradicts Lemma (44). J 

Part (a) 

The following definitions and lemmas will be useful here and later. (Unproved lemmas are easily verified.) 

(43) DEFINITION. The collection of all total Ce Children (ie., defined on every ¢ € SEQ) is denoted Tot-Chil. 

(44) Lemma. Tot-Chil is not identifiable. 

Lemmas (5) and (53) prove Part (a) of Proposition (7). 

Proof. By mapping each oe SEQ into its index under our fixed ordering of SEQ, the lemma is an immediate 

Part (b) 

consequence of (Gold, 1967, Th. 1.5). fj 

(54) DeFINitIon. The set {xe N|W, is infinite} is denoted inf. 

(45) DeFINITION. The collection of all finite languages is denoted FIN. 

(55) LemMa. There is total recursive f: N— N such that for allie N: 

(46) LemMA. There is a total computable function pad: FINxN—WN with the following properties. For ail LeéeFIN andieN, 

(a) Cy)€ Tot-Chil, 

(a) Woaat, y= L, and (b) pad(L, i+1)> pad(L, i). 

(b) ifie inf then scope[ Cy,;,] = FIN; 

(c) ifi¢inf then scope[ Cy;[] contains][ no][ language][ with] more than one member. In particular, either scope [Cy] ={@} or scope[ Cy;,| is the collection of singleton languages plus @. 

(47) DeEFINITION. (a) We let F be a computable bijection from FIN to SEQ. 

480/39 /2-2 

140 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

Proof. Recall the specification of pad in Lemma (46). Given xe N and n>0 we say that W, is “new at n” justin case the cardinality of W,, ,, exceeds that of W,,,_,.'* Now let igN and oe SEQ be given. If length(c)=0 we define Cyi)(a) to be some fixed index for @. Otherwise 

==> picture [196 x 56] <==

h is defined 

in subsecti ding cl 

where o— 1s defined in su section 4.1.2. Regarding clause (a), it is clear that C,,;) is total. To verify clause(b) of the lemma, suppose that ieinf. From the definition of pad it is clear that scope Cy;,] S FIN. For the converse, let Le FIN and text t for L be given. Let m,éN be such that L=range(t{[m,]). Since re inf there is no > imo such that W, is new at no. It follows that C,,,, converges on ¢ to pad(range(t{m,]}, 9), which is an index for L. To verify clause (c) of the lemma, suppose that / ¢ inf. Let m,€N be such that for alln =m,, W; is not new atn. Let L be any language containing two numbers x, y, and consider any text ¢ for ZL that begins with m, repetitions of x. It is Clear that Cy,;, converges on f to pad({x}),0), which is not an index for L. It is also wasy to see that if Wi=D then scope [Cy] ={@}, and if W,#@ (still finite) then scope[ C,y;)] is the collection of singleton languages Ptus g PASS) 6 BUAESS 

(56) Derinirion. Let f be as specified in Lemma (55). The collection {Cy,,jie N} is denoted G. 

. We take @; to witness clause (b) of Proposition (7). 

(57) Lemma. is weakly delimitable. 

Proof. Let ig be an index for a child that identifies FIN, and let /e Linguists be the constant i, function. Then by Lemma (55), / weakly delimits ¢. J 

Prior to showing that @,is not delimitable, we state three more lemmas. {The first will be used in later proofs as well). 

> (58) LEMMA. (a) Suppose that €CChildren is delimitable. Then there is total le Linguists that delimits @.

(b} Suppose that @ & Children is characterizable. Then there is total le Linguists that characterizes ©. 

(c) Suppose that € < Children is weakly characterizable. Then there is total le Linguists that weakly characterizes @. 

Proof. An easy adaptation of (Osherson et al., 1986b, Prop. 4.3.1B). J 

> '4 W,, is the set of numbers emerging from the nth step in the standard enumeration of W,.

(59) Lemma. There is total recursive g. N— N such that for allie N: 

. 

(a) Cggy€ Tot-Chil 

(b) scope[ Ci)[]][ 2][ scope[][C;];]

(c) If scope[ C,] includes no languages with more than | element then this is true for scope C,;,] as well; 

(d} for all languages L, Lescope[Cy;)] if and only if there is j¢ N and a € SEQ with the following properties: 

==> picture [72 x 12] <==

ee iii, For all teSEQ such that t extends o and range(t) CL, Cyt) =j ‘78°\?) =* bso? s 

Proof. The lemma follows from an easy modification of the proof of Corollary 4.6.3A in (Osherson et al., 1986b), based on a construction found in (Blum & Blum, 1975). J 

Background material for the next lemma, as well as its di ¢ proof, may be found in Chap. 14 of (Rogers, 1987). 

(60) Lemma. inf is J7,-complete in the arithmetical hierarchy. 

==> picture [148 x 36] <==

Proof. Suppose for a contradiction that /e Linguists . delimits @. By Lemma (58a), / may be assumed total. Let je inf be given, and let L = {0, 1}. Then, Cy; identifies L, so / converges on the data sequence for Cy, to some je N such that C, identifies Z. Hence, letting g be as specified in Lemma (59), C,,;) identifies L. So there is some ge SEQ with range(o) | L such that C,,;)(@) is an index for L and Ca (t) = Cy (0) for any te SEQ that extends o with range(t) & L. Relying on the totality of L Cy;,, and C,,;), we may summarize as follows. 

, . (62) Suppose that ie ing. Then there exist a€ SEG, o € SEO, and x, j,k € N with the following properties. 

(a) range(a.) is a subset of the data sequence for Cy);

(b) Ma)=ys,

() c ) range(o) CL;

(d) Cay (a) =;

(e) L= Wy,x

(f) for all Be SEG, te SEQ and z> x,

   i. if f extends « and f is a subset of the data sequence

for C,,;,Fé) then I( 8) = j; 

i. ift extends o and range(t) SL then C,,,,(t) =k;

ii L=W,,.

Now let i¢inf be given. Then Cay) does not identify L since L has more than one member. So / converges on the 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

141 

data sequence for C,,;, to some j€N such that C; does not identify L. Hence by clause (c) of Lemma (59), C,,;, does not identify Z. By clause (d) of the lemma, it follows that there is no ge SEQ with range(a) SL such that C,,(¢) is an index for L and C,,(t)= Cy)(a) for any te SEQ that extends o with range(t) < L. Summarizing: 

(63) Suppose that i¢inf. Then there do not exist ae SEG, o€ SEQ, and x,j,keN with the properties specified in (62). 

However, (62) and (63) exhibit inf as 5, contradicting Lemma (60). Jj 

Lemmas (57) and (61) prove Part (b) of Proposition. (7). 

Part {c) 

Part (c) of the proposition is an immediate consequence of Proposition (13) and Theorem (26c), both of which are proved below. 

Proof of Proposition (9) 

. 

Let Y= {tipa liek } , where K is any recursively enumerable, nonrecursive set. It is easy to define Coe Children with scope[ Cy] = &. On the other hand, Y is not indexable, since otherwise K could be exhibited as recursively enumerable. C, thus witnesses the proposition. 

Proof of Proposition (12) 

Part (a) 

Let @,,, be as defined in (49). 

(64) LEMMA. @,,, is characterizable. 

Proof. Let ig be such that FIN = (W; J © Wah (It is easy to see that such an ég exists.) Let /€ Linguists be the constant i, function. Then by (50), / characterizes @,.,. J 

Lemmas (64) and (53) prove Part(a) of Proposition (12). 

Part (b) 

Let €-be as defined in (36). 

(65) Lemma. (a) For every Ce@,, scope[C] is indexable. 

(b) €, is weakly characterizable. 

. Proof. For (a), observe that by Lemma (55), for every ie N, scope[ C,jy] is either FIN(iie in), f {@} (if W;= ©) or the collection of singleton languages along with @ (if W,#@ but finite). In all three cases, scope[Cy;)] is indexable. ] rr. inguists “2 (b), _ ‘0 the be such constant that -/) function. ~ (7% Fi)< Wthn e £) ere weakly characterizes @,. 

(66) LemMa. G;,is not characterizable. 

Proof. Suppose for a contradiction that /e Linguists characterizes @,. By Lemma (58b), i may be assumed total. Let ieinf be given, and let L= {0, 1}. Then, Cy, identifies L, so / converges on the data sequence for Cy;, to someje N such that Le {W,|ke W,\. Thus, relying on the totality of land Cy, we have: 

(67) Suppose that icinf. Then there exist «<¢ SEG and x, y, j,k €N with the following properties. 

(a) range(a) is; a subset of the data sequence for Cy);

(b) Kaj=¥;

(c) ke W,J 3

(d) L=W, ,;

(e) forall Se SEG and z> yj,

   i. if f extends a and f is a subset of the data sequence

for Cy; then (8) =/; 

i, L=W,...

Now let i¢inf be given. Then Cy, does not identify Z since L has more than one member. So / converges on the data sequence for Cy;, to some jeN such that > é{W,|ke W;}. Summarizing: 

‘ 

a 

(68) Suppose that i¢inf. Then there do not exist ae SEG and x, y,j,keN with the properties specified in (67). However, (67) and (68) exhibit inf as 2, contradicting Lemma (60). J Lemmas (65) and (66) prove Part(b) of Proposition (12). 

Part (c) 

Part (c) of the proposition is an immediate consequence of Theorem (26), proved below ©0 > prowee nero 

Proof of Proposition (13) 

We rely on the following remarkable result, proved in (Kurtz & Royer, 1988) (building on (Fulk, 1990)). 

(69) Lemma. There is a total recursive function f: NN such that for all ieN, scope[C;] S scope[ Cyi)] = {W,,|I0 € SEQ(k = Cy (a))}- 

From (69) it is easy to derive: 

(70} Lemma. There is a_ total recursive function g: N— N such that for allke N: 

_ 

(a) {W,|xe Wy} is identifiable,

(b) {W,|xe Wag} Bscope[C;,[].]

weaklyTo prove delimitable, Proposition and let (13), /e¢ suppo Linguits s e tha winess t @ S this. Children Define is I’ to be gol. Then it is easy to verify that /’ weakly characterizes @. Intuitively, /’ relies on an internal simulation of /, 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

142 

to which it presents incoming data «. When /responds toa with conjecture /, /’ uses g to convert i into an index for an identifiable collection of languages that includes scope[ C;]. Since / weakly delimits @, for every Ce@, / converges on the data sequence for C to some ie N such that scope[C]< scope[ C,]. So gol converges to g(i) with {W,|xeW,,;,} identifiable and { W,.|x € W,,;)} 2 scope[ C,] > scope[ C]. 

Proof of Theorem (26) 

First we define ¢ < Children that satisfies conditions (a) and (b) of the theorem. Then we demonstrate that ¢ is not weakly characterizable. 

Specification of @ 

Jlength(o)>1, the following property holds, where np is some fixed index for N. 

CCa)e {no} U range\ fin) u range(inf).;Ca)e {no} U range\ fin) u range(inf).; {no} U range\ fin) u range(inf).; U range\ fin) u range(inf).; range\ fin) u range(inf).; fin) u range(inf).; 

(75) CCa)e {no} U range\ fin) u range(inf).;Ca)e {no} U range\ fin) u range(inf).; {no} U range\ fin) u range(inf).; U range\ fin) u range(inf).; range\ fin) u range(inf).; fin) u range(inf).; Let o€ SEQ be given. The definition of C;, proceeds by cases, depending on the length of g.\° 

Definition of Cy 

Case (a): length(c)=0. Then C,(c)=some selected index for @. 

Case (b): length(a) = 1. Suppose that the sole member of content(a) has the form <i, x). Then there are two subcases. 

Case (b-i): f(<i,x>) = finite. Then C{a) = fin({ <i, x>}). 

) 

(a) 

Observe that for all ¢¢ SEQ with length(o); = 1, (75) holds. Case (c): length(c)>1. Suppose as induction hypothesis that (75) holds for o—. Then there are five subcases. 

The set {<i,; y>|ye N} is denoted N,. 

— oon . (b) Sis ibased just in case SCN,. If S is ibased for some ie N then S is based, otherwise unbased. 

(c) Theclass of nonempty, i-based, finite sets is denoted &(i). The class of nonempty, based, finite sets is denoted &. 

Case (c-t): Cha —)=no. Then Ca) = no. Case (c-ii): C,(o—) = xe range( fin) U range(inf), Wis i-based, and a,,,, has the form <j, y> for j#i. Then 

(72) fin: a”DEFINITION. N anda total We recursive choose function a computable inf: functN— N wth i on Cia) = no. ollowing prop : and Gn5,=<i,y> 

Case(c-iii). CAo~)=xerange(inf), W, is based, and Gn5,=<i,y> for some y. Then Cc)=Cia—) (=inf(i), an index for N,). 

(a) range(fin) is recursive.

(b) For all BEB, Wy5) = B.

Case (c-iv): C,a—)=xerange( fin), W,, is i-based, Ctasr = <i, Y> for some y, and . F(Ki, y>)=/finite. Then Cha) = fin( W,.[¥][ {Gigs}] ), Which is an index for content(c) € Bi). Note that Ca) = CAo—) if o,,., € content(a— ). Case (c-v): CAa—)=xerange( fin), W,, is i-based, Onn =<iy) for some y, and f(<i, y))=infinite. Then C,(a) = inf(i) (an index for N,). 

(c) range(inf) is recursive.

(d) For allie N, Wyn y=—N (¢) oF PENS T infli) oF running There ; enn vee deli h:iw N that moun’ the time of the indexes delivered by fin and inf. That is: 

i. For all Be @ and x EN, if Pyn.a)(x) converges then it converges within A(x) steps. 

Observe that (75) holds for o in the present case. 

i. For all ixeEN if @ingij(x) converges then it converges within A(x) steps. 

End Definition 

It is easy to verify the existence offin and inf, as well as the truth of the following claim. 

In view of Lemma (73), it is easy to see that C, is computable. Examination of its behavior also verifies the following, 

(73) LemMA. (a) range(fin) nrange(inf) = @. (b) The inverse function fin—':range( fin) > @ is computable. 

(76) Lemma. Let fe F be given.

(a) C,identifies N.

(c) There is a computable function g:range(inf)>N — (b) For allie N, if there allie N, if there N, if there if there there isxeN such that f(<i, xd) = such that for all x € range(inf), if W, is i-based then g(x)=1. _ infinite then C, identifies Nj. 

For allie N, if there allie N, if there N, if there if there there isxeN such that f(<i, xd) = 

(¢) For alli, x9, .. XnN, ff(Ci, X;)) = finite for j<n then C; identifies {C5 XO), nn Ch Xn?Pe 

(74) DerINITION. We consider the expressions finite and infinite to be prolix symbols for two, distinct natural numbers. The class of all total recursive mappings of N into { finite, infinite} is denoted ¥. 

(d) LetieN be given. Iff(<i, x>) = finite for all x EN, then C; identifies Bti). 

Now let fe F be given. We define an associated learner C,e Children. It will be the case that for all ce SEQ with 

'5 Reminder: o— is o without its last member. ¢;,., is the last member ofe. 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

143 

(e) For all LCN, if C;, identifies L then either L=N, Le Bi) for some i, or L has the form N;. 

Intuitively, Cy is the longest initial segment of C,(in terms of the standard ordering on SEQ) that is defined by X. 

We take @ to be {C,| fe F}. 

89) LE ; (82) MMA.Ma. LetfeFLei fe b© gnen . 

> Let us verify; that @ satisfies. clause (a) of the theorem. becauseSince every o € SEQ satisfies (75), C,is total. C,is consistent

> for every nonempty a e SEQ, if content(o) isi-based

> thencontent(a)either is unbasedWo,,,=N;a) theni Wor coxa)We,,,=content(c), =Cla) N. To see that Cis> and con-if servative, observe that C, modifies its current conjecture only upon receiving an element outside of the conjectured set. To verify memory-limitedness, it suffices to observe that Cy(o) is determined by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, is determined by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, determined by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, and Co—). That C, Co—). That C, That C, C, — (83) is prudent follows easily from (75) and (76). Similarly, the decisiveness of C, is obvious from its definition.

(a) Suppose that X, Yare finite subsets of f with XE Y. Then CyS Cy. 

(b) wei X;|i. eM} meebsets offoucncm MS Xi for ie N and View Xi= f Then Usew Cx,= Cy 

Now let Je Linguists be given, and suppose that: 

Cy(o) is determined by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, is determined by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, determined by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, by Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, Oy,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C,f(Fiasr), and Co—). That C, and Co—). That C, Co—). That C, That C, C, — (83) 

(83) J weakly characterizes the class of all C,¢@ such that & is either @-oriented or N-oriented. 

That @ satisfies clause (b) of the theorem follows immediately from (72e) and the fact that (75) holds for all ae SEQ. 

We shall exhibit f¢ ¥ such that / fails to converge on the data sequence for C,. It follows that / fails to weakly characterize @, hence that @ is not weakly characterizable. 

jis constructed in stages. At each stage n we specify finite Lof. 

€ Is Not Weakly Characterizable 

Our proof that @ is not weakly characterizable is inspired by a construction due to Gold (1967). The following lemma a construction due to Gold (1967). The following lemma construction due to Gold (1967). The following lemma due to Gold (1967). The following lemma to Gold (1967). The following lemma Gold (1967). The following lemma (1967). The following lemma The following lemma following lemma lemma — Construction of the I,’s is a simple adaptation of (Osherson et al., 1986b, Excercise 2.2A), also due to Gold. 

by a construction due to Gold (1967). The following lemma a construction due to Gold (1967). The following lemma construction due to Gold (1967). The following lemma due to Gold (1967). The following lemma to Gold (1967). The following lemma Gold (1967). The following lemma (1967). The following lemma The following lemma following lemma lemma — Construction of the I,’s 

Staged: Ih=. 

(77) Lemma. Let ieN be given. No Ce Children identifies both N,; and B(i). 

Stagen+1: Suppose that finite function J, has been constructed by the end of stagen. We show how to construct J, , ,. By Lemma (80) choose g, he F such that g and h both extend /,, g is @-oriented, and A is N-oriented. By (83), / converges on the data sequence for C, to xeN wSmilarly, i th X={W,|jeW,} / converges on >scope[C,] and the data sequence X for iden C, t ifiable.o ye N Lemmawith Y={W,|jeW,} (79), x # y. Hence, >scope[C,} there are and arbitrarily ¥ identifiable. large finite By sets G, H such that I,cGcg, I,cHchA and KC,)# !(Cx). In view of Lemma (82a), one such set /, ., may be selected with the following properties. 

Some we ; further definitions and lemmas will be helpful. 

(78) DEFINITION. Let fe ¥ be given. 

von teis. B-oriented just. in case {i|B(i)gs: S scope| C,}} is_ 

- (b) fis N-oriented just in case {i|N;€scope[C;}} is_ cofinite. 

Lemma (76) shows that both @-oriented and N-oriented f¢F exist. From Lemma (77), we have: 

(79) LemMa. Let ge F be &-oriented, and let he F be N-oriented. Then there is no CeChildren such that scope[ C] > scope[ C,] v scopel Cy]. 

(a) £,,,>20,;

ee tufts (b) fefor some ze { finite, infinite}, (n, z) EI, +13: 

The next two lemmas are easy to verify.| 

(c) KC,,,,)#NC,).

(80) Lemma. Let X be a finite subset of fe F%. Then there are g,heF such that: 

canMoreoverbe chosen uniform by wenn (80) recursively and me on computabaty[the] basis of OfEJ,,. Ina 

(a) Xog,XCA,

End C 

{b) g is B-oriented. 

na Contruction 

(c) his N-oriented.

Clauses (a) and (b) of the construction ensure that Unew tn isa total function from N to i tn isa total function from N to i isa total function from N to i total function from N to i function from N to i from N to i N to i to i i[[nite, infinite}.]] Since J,,,, is constructed uniformly recursively from /,, f is recursive, so fe #. Hence Cre @. By Lemma (82b), C,=U, -n C,,, hence by (c) of the construction / changes its conjecture infinitely often on the data sequence for C,. Thus, / does not converge on Cy. 

Moreover, indexes for g and A can be constructed from XY f_ Unew tn isa total function from N to i tn isa total function from N to i isa total function from N to i total function from N to i function from N to i from N to i N to i to i i[[nite, infinite}.]] 

uniform recursivel 

y. 

(81) Dertnirion. Let X be a finite subset of feF. Let mg¢N be greatest such that U,<,,,content(o;)S domain(X). Then {(¢;, C,(o;))|i< mo} is denoted Cy. 

144 

OSHERSON AND WEINSTEIN 

Proof of Theorem (28) 

to verify.We tely Recall on the frm f o llowing Definition lemmas, (45) that the first FIN of iswhich the collec- is easy tion of all finite languages. 

(84) Lemma. There is total computable F: FIN x SEG — N such that for all Le FIN and ae SEG, 

> a) C extends a, and Caza) , scope[ Car, oy] = {N, L}.

(a) 

(b) 

(85) DeFIniTION. (a) The collection {Cyz,,,,|L¢FIN, ae SEG} is denoted two. 

(b) Given a€ SEG, the collection { Cyr, a |L€FIN} is denoted two[ ao]. 

(86) _, {W,\ie Lemma. W,,) is identifiable For every then neN there is and Ce two[a] a€SEG, such thatif {W,|ie W,} ZB scope[C]. 

Proof. Otherwise, by (84b), identifiable {W,|ie W,,} would include a superfinite collection, contradicting Gold’s theorem (Gold, 1967). J 

Now . . . let le Linguists be given, and suppose that / weakly characterizes two. We shall exhibit C, € Children with the following properties: 

(a) 

scope[Cy]= {BS ; - 

(b) {does not weakly characterize Cy. 

Thisa. will suffice to prove (28). Without loss of generality, by Lemma (58c), 7 is assumed to be total. 

We construct C, in stages. At each stage m we specify a longer finite initial s ent J. of C,’ h ge epm m OF Go 8 grapa. 

; ; 

Construction of the I,,’s 

Stage 

0: L=m. 0= OD 

Stagem+1: Suppose that J,,eSEG of length p has been constructed by the end of stage m. Extend J,, to 7* of length p+l by adding the pair (Gm sts m+1) to the end of I,, (this will prevent C, from identifying any language oter h er th Sj is total. letn = 1(7*). By L 86 there t lanis @).CetwoSincethat/is total,extendslet n=/ (7*).* suchBy emmathat (either) {W,lie W,,} 2 scope| Cj} or {W,\ie W,,} is not identifiable. Hence, since / weakly characterizes two, / does not converge on C to n. Hence, there is «¢ SEG such that « extends . a I, and /( a) # KZ,,). Yn Md of Lemma (84), such an a can be found uniformly recursively in /,, via a dovetail search. Set J,” 4, =a. 

End Construction 

It is clear from the construction that / changes its conjecture at least m times on segment I,,. Consequently, ] does not converge on Cyo=()0 MimeN T,,im to any index, hence ™ does y ? scope{ C4Cy) =v8! characterize; Co. It is also clear that 

Remarks on the Theorems of Section 5 

standard,Theorems recursion-theoretic (31)-(33) are derived tricks from involving (26) and “pairing” (28) using and “projection” functions (Rogers, 1987, Sect. 5.3). 

Theorem (36) follows from the fact, proven in (Osherson et al., 1986b, Prop. 8.2.2A), that any consistent, conservative, prudent* child is text-efficient. 

* Starting from the proofs of (26) and (28), Theorems (38) and (39) may be derived from (Osherson et al., 1986b, Cor. 6.5.1A) with the use of pairing and projection. 

Proposition (42) is an easy consequence of the fact that for any recursive h:No> N, the graphs of the h-fast children can be uniformly-recursively enumerated in ascending order.order. IdentificatIdentification can thusthus bebe achieved achieved usingusing “induct“induction py enumeration” (Gold, 1967; Kurtz & Smith, 1988). 

REFERENCES 

Angluin, D. (1980). Inductive inference of formal languages from positive data, information and Control, 45, 117-135,

Angluin, D. (1988). Identifying languages from stochastic examples (Tech. Rep. 614). Yale University. 

Angluin, D., & Smith, C. (1983). A survey of inductive inference: Theory Baker,and methods. C. (1979). Syntactic Computing theory Surveys, and 15, the 237-289. projection problem. Linguistic

projection problem. Linguistic problem. Linguistic Linguistic

Inquiry, 10, 533-981.

Berwick, R. (1986). The acquisition of syntactic knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Bickerton, D. (1981). The roots of language. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma, Blum, L., & Blum, M. (1975). Toward a mathematical theory ofinductive inference. Jnformation and Control, 28, 125-155. 

Blum, M. (1967). A machine-independent theory of the complexity of the recursive functions. Journal of the ACM, 14 (2), 322-336. Blumer, A., Ehrenfeucht, A., Haussler, D., & Warmuth, M. (1986). Classifying learnable geometric concepts with the vapnik-chervonenkis dimension. In Symposium on the theory of computation. Borer, H., & Wexler, K. (1987). The maturation of syntax. In T. Roeper & E. Williams, (Eds.), Parameter setting. Dordrecht: Reidel. Brown, R.,& Fane R.,& Fane Fane (1970). Derivational complexity and the order of acquisition in child speech. In J. R. Hayes {Eds.), Cognition and the development of language. New York: Wiley. 

Brown, R.,& Fane R.,& Fane Fane

Case,identification. J., & Lynes, Lecture C. (1982), Notes Machine in Computer inductive Science, inference 140, 107-115. and language

Case, J., & Smith, C. (1983). Comparison of identification criteria for machine inductive inference. Theoretical Computer Science, 25, 193-220, Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N. (1975). Reflections on language. New York: Random House. Chomsky, N. (1980). Rules and representations. New York: Columbia Univ. Press. , Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding. New York: Foris. Chomsky, N. (1986). Knowledge of language: Its nature, origin, and use. New York: Praeger. . Daley, R., & Smith, C. (1986). On the complexity of inductive inference. Information and Computation, 69, 12-40. Demetras, M., Post, K., & Snow, C. (1986). Feedback to first language learners:Child Language, The role 13, of 275-292. repetitions and clarification questions. Journal of 

FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 

145 

Ehrenfeucht, A., Haussler, D., Kearns, M., & Valiant, L. {1989}. A general lower bound on the number of examples needed for learning. Information and Computation, 82, 247-62.

   Osherson, D., & Weinstein, §, (1982a). Criteria of language learning. Information and Control, 52, 123-138.

   Osherson, D., & Weinstein, S. (1982b). A note on formal learning theory. Cognition, 11, 77-88.

Frank, R. (1992). Formal grammar and the acquisition of complex sentences. In Eastern States Conference on Linguistics, 8.

   Penner, S. (1987). Parental responses to grammatical and ungrammatical child utterances. Child Development, 58, 376-384.

Fulk, M. (1988). Saving the phenomena: Requirements that inductive inference machines not contradict known data. Information and computation, 79, 193-209,

   Piatelli-Palmarini, M. (Ed.). (1980). Language and learning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.

Fulk, M. (1990). Prudence and other conditions on formal language Pierce, A., & Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early A., & Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early & Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early A crosslinguistic study of negation in early crosslinguistic study of negation in early study of negation in early of negation in early negation in early in early early learning. Information and Computation, 85, 1-1). syntactic development, Paper presented at the 15th Boston University development, Paper presented at the 15th Boston University Paper presented at the 15th Boston University presented at the 15th Boston University at the 15th Boston University the 15th Boston University 15th Boston University Boston University University

Fulk, M., & Case, J. (Eds.). (1990). Proceedings of the third annual Conference on Language Development. on Language Development. Language Development. Development. workshop on computational learning theory. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Pierce, A. E. (1992). Language Acquisition and syntactic theory. Dordrecht: Kaufmann. Kluwer.

Fulk, M,, & Jain, S. (1994). Approximate inference and scientific method. _ Pinker, S. {1979}, Formal models of language learning. Cognition, 7, 217-283. Information and Computation, 114, 179-191. Pinker, S. (1986). Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. S. (1986). Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. (1986). Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. and conservatism in language acquisition. conservatism in language acquisition. in language acquisition. language acquisition. acquisition.

   Pierce, A., & Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early A., & Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early & Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early Deprez, V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early V. (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early (1990). A crosslinguistic study of negation in early A crosslinguistic study of negation in early crosslinguistic study of negation in early study of negation in early of negation in early negation in early in early early syntactic development, Paper presented at the 15th Boston University development, Paper presented at the 15th Boston University Paper presented at the 15th Boston University presented at the 15th Boston University at the 15th Boston University the 15th Boston University 15th Boston University Boston University University Conference on Language Development. on Language Development. Language Development. Development.

   Pinker, S. (1986). Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. S. (1986). Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. (1986). Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. Productivity and conservatism in language acquisition. and conservatism in language acquisition. conservatism in language acquisition. in language acquisition. language acquisition. acquisition. In W. Demopoulos and A. Marras (Eds.), Language fearning and concept acquisition. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Fulk, M., Jain, S., & Osherson, D. (1992). Open problems in systems that learn, Journal of Computer and System Sciences.

Gibson, T. & Wexler, K. (1994). Triggers. Linguistic Inquiry, 25 (4).

   Pinker, S. (1989). Language acquisition. In M. Posner (Ed.}, Foundations of cognitive science (pp. 359-399), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Gold, E. M. (1967). Language identification in the limit. Information and Control, 10, 447-474.

Goldman, A. (1986). Episternology and cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.

   Pinker, S. (1990), Language acquisition. In D. Osherson and H. Lasnik (Eds.), Invitation to cognitive science: Language {pp. 199-241). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

   Pitt, L. (1985). Probabilistic inductive inference. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Yale University, New Haven, CT.

   Putnam, H.(1975). Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, H.(1975). Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter,(1975). Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, In Mathematics, matter, Mathematics, matter, matter, and method. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. method. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. Cambridge Univ. Press. Univ. Press. Press.

   Rivest, R., Haussler, D., & Warmuth, M. K. (Eds.). (1989). Proceedings of the second annual workshop on computational learning theory. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

Haussler, D., & Pitt, L. (Eds.}. (1988). Proceedings of the 1988 workshop on Computational learning theory. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

Hirsh-Pasel, K., Treiman, R., & Schneiderman, M. (1984). Brown and Hanlon revisited: Mothers’ sensitivity to ungrammatical forms, Journal of Child Language, 11, 81-88.

Hsu, J. R., Cairns, H. S, & Fiengo, R. (1985). The development of grammars underlying children’s interpretation of complex sentences. Cognition, 20.

   = Putnam, H.(1975). Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, H.(1975). Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter,(1975). Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, Probability and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, and confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, confirmation. In Mathematics, matter, In Mathematics, matter, Mathematics, matter, matter, and method. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. method. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. Cambridge Univ. Press. Univ. Press. Press.

   Rogers, H. (1987). Theory of recursive functions and effective computability, New York: MIT Press.

Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period effects in second language learning: The influence of maturational state on the acquisition of english as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60-99.

Kurtz, 8. A., & Royer, J. (1988). Prudence in language learning. In D. Haussler & L. Pitt (Eds.), Proceedings of the workshop on computational learning theory, (pp. 143-156). San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

Kurtz, 8. A., & Smith, C. A. (1988). On the enumeration technique (Tech. Rep, 88-013). University of Chicago, Department of Computer Science.

Machtey, M., & Young, P. (1978}. An introduction to the general theory of algorithms. New York: North-Holland.

Mazurkewich, I, & White, L. (1984). The acquisition of dative-alternation: Unlearning overgeneralizations. Cognition, 16 (3), 261-283.

   Royer, J. (1986). Inductive inference of approximations. /nformution and Control, 70, 156-178.

   Sankoff, G., & Brown, P. (1976). The origins of syntax in discourse: A case study of tok pisin relatives. Language, 52, 631-666.

   Smith, C. (1979). Hierarchies of identification criteria for mechanised inductive inference. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, SUNY, Buffalo.

   Snow, C. E., & Ferguson, C. (Eds.). (1977). Talking to children: Language input and acquisition, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

   Valiant, L. (1984). A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27, 1134-1142.

   van Riemskijk, H., & Wikliams, E. (1986). Introduction to the theory of grammar, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Newport, E., Gleitman, L., & Gleitman, H. (1977). Mother I’d rather do it myself: Some effects and noneffects of maternal speech style. In C.Snow and C, Ferguson (Eds.), Talking to children: Language input and acquisition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

   Villiers, J. D., Roeper, T., & Vainikka, A. (1990). The acquisition of long distance rules. In L. Frazier and J. D. Villiers (Eds.}, Language processing and language acquisition. Dordrecht/Norwell, MA: Kluwer, Academic.

Newport, E. L., & Supalla, T. (1989). A critical period effect in the acquisition ofa primary language. Science.

Niyogi, P., & Berwick, R. C. (1994). A language learning modelfor finite parameter spaces. (Techn. Rep.} MIT Center for Biological and Computational Learning.

Osherson, D., Stob, M., & Weinstein, S. (1982). Learning strategies. Information and Control, 53, 32-51.

Osherson, D., Stob, M., & Weinstein, S. (1984). Learning theory and natural language. Cognition, 17 (1), 1-28.

Weihrauch, K. (1987). Computability. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

| Wexler, K. (1982). On extensional learnability. Cognition, 11, 89-95. 

   Wexler, K., & Culicover, P. (1980). Formal principles of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

   Wexler, K., & Manzini, R. (1987). Parameters and learnability in binding theory. In T. Roeper and E, Williams (Eds.), Parameter setting. Dordrecht: Reidel).

   Wiehagen, R. (1978). Characterization problems in the theory of inductive inference, In Proceedings of the Fifth Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (pp. 494-508),

   Wiehagen, R., Freivald, R. & Kinber, E. (1984). On the power of probabilistic strategies in inductive inference. Theoretical Computer Science, 28, 111-133.

Osherson, D., Stob, M., & Weinstein, S. (1986a). Analysis of a learning paradigm. In W. Demopoulos and A. Marras (Eds.}, Language learning and concept acquisition. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Osherson, D., Stob, M., & Weinstein, S. (1986b). Systems that learn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Osherson, D., Stob, M. & Weinstein, S. (1988). Synthesizing inductive expertise. Information and Computation, 77, 138-161.

Received: October 19, 1992 

