10.1006/jmps.1995.1028
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 39, 275-284 {1995} 

Computational Complexity of Syntactic Agreement and Lexical Ambiguity 

Eric Sven RisTaD* 

Princeton University 

In this article, we demonstrate that the process of computing such syntactic knowledge according to modern as any problem solvable in nondeterministic polynomial ; T ib time). he results reported here contribute to a larger research program, whose goal is to characterize the complexity of human language (Chomsky, 1956; Barton, Berwick, & Ristad, 1987). 

What do language users know about particular utterances, and how was seen by ary. nglish speakers are able to determine, among other things, that Mary is the underlying subject of the sentence (that is, she is the person who did the seeing}; that the thing that she saw was Kate; that the utterance is in the passive voice; and that the “seeing” event referred to by the utterance occurred in the past. In this article, we demonstrate that the process of computing such syntactic knowledge is NP-hardr according' Cc. to Modern transformational grammars. © 1995 

language,However, our unlike proof prior is. not work based on on the a complexity complete formaliza- ofnatural. tion of a linguistic theory. Instead, we proceed as follows. First we identify a class of structural descriptions defined by five essential properties. Next, we prove that the language comprehension problem will be NP-hard for any linguistic theory. that generates our class of structural descriptions.. Finally, we demonstrate that the modern transformational 8!@™mars of Lasnick & Saito (1984) and Chomsky (1986) generate this class of structural descriptions and consequently are NP-hard. F lexi . The indirect nature of our complexity analysis has the singular virtue of not relying on any easily changed details of the linguistic theory or on any arbitrary choices made during formalization. At its heart, our analysis argues that the linguistic Phenomenon of syntactic agrcement and lexical ambiguity itself causes computational intractability. Thus, our work builds on the prior work of Ristad & Berwick (1989), who demonstrated that syntactic Aree ment and unitteation. lexical* basedambiguity grammars.”causes] Theintractability Re hat thein same linguistican, tinue on rise to ” “k ness ™ two very different inguistic rameworks—transformational grammars and unification-based grammars —argues strongly that the process oflanguage comprehension is itself NP-hard. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

What we do language users know about particular utterances, and> how do they compute this knowledge?. These two questions are central to the computational investigation of human language. The defining charac. teristic of a computation is its complexity—the amount of time and space that it requires (Carey & Johnson, 1979). This article contributes to the computational study of article contributes to the computational study of contributes to the computational study of to the computational study of the computational study of computational study of study of of _ human language by analyzing the complexity of computing the language users’ knowledge of syntax 

This article contributes to the computational study of article contributes to the computational study of contributes to the computational study of to the computational study of the computational study of computational study of study of of _ 

The complete comprehension of an utterance requires, in part, a complete structural description of that utterance. The structural description represents the language users’ syntactic knowledge of that utterance. For example, in order to fully comprehend the English sentence Kate was seenother by Mary, things, that the> Mary language is the user underlying must determine, subject among3 of the the modem unitteation.. sentence (that is, she is the person who did the seeing); that the thing that she saw was Kate; that the utterance isin the passive voice; and that the “seeing” event referred to by the utterance occurred in the past. The language user also knows that the proper noun Kate and the auxiliary verb was are both singular and that they are in agreement. 

> 3 of the the modem unitteation.. * 

Correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed to Eric Sven Ristad, 35 Olden Street, Princeton, NJ 08544-2087, 

' Unification-based grammars include grammatica] systems whose central formal device is the unification of feature sets, such as head-driven phrase structure grammar (Pollard & Sag, 1987), generalized phrase structure grammar (Gazdar, Klein, Pullum, & Sag, 1985), and lexical-functional grammar (Bresnan, 1982). Lexical-functional grammar and generalized —_ phrase structure grammar have independently been shown to be NP-hard { Berwick, 1982) and EXP-POLY time hard (Ristad, 1990), respectively. 

*The author is particularly grateful to Robert C. Berwick, Noam Chomsky, Tanya Reinhart, and Esther Torrego for their assistance and constructive criticisms. The author was supported by an IBM fellowship and by NSF Young Investigator Award IR1-9258517 while working on the material reported herein. 

275 

0022-2496/95 $12.00 

Copyright © 1995 by Academic Press, Inc. Ali rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 

ERIC SVEN RISTAD 

276 

The remainder of the article 1s organized into four sec3. MORPHO-SYNTACTIC DEPENDENCIES tions. First, Section 2 introduces the lexical resolution problem (LRP). Informally, the LRP is the computational According to modern transformational grammars, the problem of disambiguating the lexical entries ina structural syntactic structure underlying even extremely simple condescription. We argue that this problem must be solved in _ structions can be quite intricate. Consider the simple passive order to fully comprehend an utterance. Next, Section 3 expression motivates the structural descriptions postulated by current transformational theories. In Section 4, we prove that the John was seen. (Q) LRP is NP-hard for these theories. Our proof relies only on the fact that these transformational theories generate a speWhat is it that English speakers know about this expres- is it that English speakers know about this expres- it that English speakers know about this expres- that English speakers know about this expres- English speakers know about this expres- know about this expres- about this expres- this expres- exprescial class of structural descriptions which we call a “stair.” sion? For one, they know that the expression describes an For one, they know that the expression describes an one, they know that the expression describes an they know that the expression describes an know that the expression describes an that the expression describes an the expression describes an expression describes an describes an an Finally, Section 5 demonstrates exactly how this abstract event that occurred in the past. This information is con- that occurred in the past. This information is con- occurred in the past. This information is con- in the past. This information is con- the past. This information is con- past. This information is con- This information is con- information is con- is con- conformulation applies to the “Barriers” theory of Chomsky tained in the verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past in the verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past the verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past was, which is overtly inflected for the past which is overtly inflected for the past is overtly inflected for the past overtly inflected for the past inflected for the past the past past (1986) and related transformational theories (Lasnik & tense as well as overtly agreeing with the surface subject on well as overtly agreeing with the surface subject on as overtly agreeing with the surface subject on overtly agreeing with the surface subject on agreeing with the surface subject on with the surface subject on the surface subject on surface subject on subject on on Saito, 1984; Chomsky, 1989). But let us first consider the number. One way to represent this knowledge is to say that One way to represent this knowledge is to say that way to represent this knowledge is to say that to represent this knowledge is to say that represent this knowledge is to say that this knowledge is to say that knowledge is to say that is to say that to say that say that that broad problem of computing the language user’s knowledge the overt form was underlyingly consists of the three overt form was underlyingly consists of the three form was underlyingly consists of the three was underlyingly consists of the three underlyingly consists of the three consists of the three of the three the three three of syntax. morphemes [be], [past], and [singular|. [be], [past], and [singular|. [past], and [singular|. and [singular|. [singular|.|. 

==> picture [157 x 17] <==

What is it that English speakers know about this expres- is it that English speakers know about this expres- it that English speakers know about this expres- that English speakers know about this expres- English speakers know about this expres- know about this expres- about this expres- this expres- expression? For one, they know that the expression describes an For one, they know that the expression describes an one, they know that the expression describes an they know that the expression describes an know that the expression describes an that the expression describes an the expression describes an expression describes an describes an an event that occurred in the past. This information is con- that occurred in the past. This information is con- occurred in the past. This information is con- in the past. This information is con- the past. This information is con- past. This information is con- This information is con- information is con- is con- contained in the verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past in the verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past the verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past verb was, which is overtly inflected for the past was, which is overtly inflected for the past which is overtly inflected for the past is overtly inflected for the past overtly inflected for the past inflected for the past the past past tense as well as overtly agreeing with the surface subject on well as overtly agreeing with the surface subject on as overtly agreeing with the surface subject on overtly agreeing with the surface subject on agreeing with the surface subject on with the surface subject on the surface subject on surface subject on subject on on number. One way to represent this knowledge is to say that One way to represent this knowledge is to say that way to represent this knowledge is to say that to represent this knowledge is to say that represent this knowledge is to say that this knowledge is to say that knowledge is to say that is to say that to say that say that that the overt form was underlyingly consists of the three overt form was underlyingly consists of the three form was underlyingly consists of the three was underlyingly consists of the three underlyingly consists of the three consists of the three of the three the three three morphemes [be], [past], and [singular|. [be], [past], and [singular|. [past], and [singular|. and [singular|. [singular|.|. 

English speakers also know that the expression is in the passive voice—that the overt subject John is subjected to the “seeing action” and therefore stands in the same relation to the verb see in (1) as it does in the corresponding active expression Someone saw John. That is, English speakers know that (1) the verbal form seen consists of the the verb root [see] and the voice morpheme [passive], which happens to be realized as the + en suffix here, and (ii) John is the underlying direct object of the verb see in both active and passive variants of the expression. 

2. THE PROBLEM FORMULATION 

In this section, we introduce the lexical resolution problem as a well-motivated subproblem of the broad language comprehension problem. The LRP is the problem of disambiguating the lexical entries in a structural description: Given a partial syntactic representation R that includes ambiguous or underspecified words, and a lexicon L containing ambiguous words, can the words in R be found in the lexicon L? 

In order to represent the knowledge that language users have about such expressions, modern transformational grammars assign the partial structural description depicted in Fig. 1 to the utterance (1), where each surface word has 

In contrast, let us redefine the acceptable parse problem (APP) to be the problem of deciding whether or not a valid structural description exists for a given utterance. Note that the APP is not equivalent to the LRP. Every solution to the LRP is a solution to the APP, but the converse is not true. As a consequence, the LRP is at least as difficult as the APP. However, the APP is an unrealistic subproblem of language comprehension for the following reason. The task of languagedescription comprehension intended by the speaker.is to find the If the exact language structural user were content to simply find any acceptable structural descriptionlanguage user of a gtven would be utterance, as free to miscomprehend per the APP, nearly then every the utterance. In contrast, the LRP requires the langnage user to find a structural description with a specified set of syntactic properties, if one exists. Thus, the LRP more closely models the true language comprehension problem, where the language user must strive to find a structural description with the same properties as the structural description intendedHaving by motivated the speaker. the LRP as a natural subproblem of 

==> picture [223 x 229] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
AgrP
I~
NP Agri
John I~
t Agr TenseP
[singular]| I~
Tense AspectP
| I~,
[past] Aspect VoiceP
P
be I~
Voice VP
[passive]| I~
v NP
| |
see ty
----- End of picture text -----

the LRP as a natural subproblem of LRP as a natural subproblem of as a natural subproblem of a natural subproblem of natural subproblem of subproblem of of language comprehension, let us now informally examine the structural descriptions postulated by modern transformational grammars. Our goal here is to provide the reader with an intuitive feel for the structural descriptions generated by these grammars. 

FIG. 1. The underlying (partial) structural description of John was seen, according to modern transformational grammars. 

277 

==> picture [205 x 9] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
COMPLEXITY OF AGREEMENT AND AMBIGUITY
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [342 x 130] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
NP[-PLU,+MASC,CASELe  NOM) VP[+AUX,+PAST,AGR NP[-PLU]}
V{+AUX, +PAST, SUBCAT 7,AGR NP(-PLU)] VP[-AUX,+PRED,VFORM PAS]
|  a
John was| |
= PAS, SUBCAT 2]
seen
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 2. The structural description of John was seen, according to unification-based grammars. 

been exploded into its underlying morphemes. For comthe agreement morpheme agreement morpheme morpheme [singular] parison, Fig. 2 depicts the structural description that would — structural description in Fig. 1. be assigned to this utterance by a typical unification-based Finally, the the underlying thematic relation between the grammar. verb see and the noun phrase see and the noun phrase and the noun phrase the noun phrase noun phrase phrase Jofn is represented indirectly 

the agreement morpheme agreement morpheme morpheme [singular] im the underlying 

Finally, the the underlying thematic relation between the verb see and the noun phrase see and the noun phrase and the noun phrase the noun phrase noun phrase phrase Jofn is represented indirectly by postulating a phonologically silent place holder that is selected by the verb see. This place holder ¢, is called a “trace.” Notice that the trace f, is assigned the same index as the element whose place it is holding (i.e., John,). 

According to modern transformational grammars, morphemes are organized hierarchically according to X-bar theory. X-bar theory states that morphemes of type X project into syntactic constituents of type X. That is simply to say that a verb phrase must contain a verb and a noun phrase must contain a noun. The relation between a__ morpheme X and its complement (a phrase YP) is represented by the sisterhood configuration inside the first projection of X: 

In assigning this representation to the utterance (1), transformational grammarians are guided by the principle of universal explanation (UE). UE states that there is only one underlying language, from which particular languages differ in trivial ways.* One consequence of UE is that if any language makes an overt distinction, then all languages must make that distinction in their underlyingly representawith their direct object and their subjects; therefore object tions. For example, in fanguages such as Hindi, verbs agree and subject must both appear in the specifier position of agreement phrases in all languages (Mahajan, 1989). A second consequence of UE is that all clauses have the same underlying structure. At the very least, a clause must oontain a subject, a tense, and a verb. And because it contains a subject, it must also contain an agreement morpheme for the subject. 

==> picture [169 x 46] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Xl
/~ (2)
XO YP
----- End of picture text -----

Lo. . . Selection is an instance of complementation. For example, the aspect morpheme [be] selects the voice morpheme [passive ]. Thus, the lack of a Voice morpheme to satisfy {be ]’s selectional requirement in the minimally different exPTESsION John was see accounts for its deviancy. ; 

Transformational grammarians are also guided by the goal of representing linguistic relations uniformly via local phrase structure configurations. For example, the selection 

The relation between the first projection of X and Its specifier (a phrase YP) is represented by sisterhood in the second projection of X: 

==> picture [88 x 43] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
X2
Uo
VP x1
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [13 x 30] <==

constitutes universal grammar, that is, a theory of the innate endowment * The principle of universal explanation is a particular theory of what of the language user. It is fundamental to the study of language. For historical example, see the influential work of James Beattie (1788), especially his analysis of tense. And in his award-winning 1827 essay on the origin of to cay upon the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection cay upon the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection upon the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection entirely deny the fundamentalconection deny the fundamentalconection the fundamentalconection fundamentalconectionconection existing between most languages? There is but one human race upon the between most languages? There is but one human race upon the most languages? There is but one human race upon the languages? There is but one human race upon the There is but one human race upon the is but one human race upon the but one human race upon the one human race upon the human race upon the race upon the upon the the earth, and but one language.” (p. 112) and but one language.” (p. 112) but one language.” (p. 112) one language.” (p. 112) language.” (p. 112) (p. 112) 112) 

The second projection X2 of the morpheme X is a phrase of je to cay upon the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection cay upon the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection upon the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection the subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection subject entirely deny the fundamentalconection entirely deny the fundamentalconection deny the fundamentalconection the fundamentalconection fundamentalconectionconection type X, also written XP. Agreement is an instance of existing between most languages? There is but one human race upon the between most languages? There is but one human race upon the most languages? There is but one human race upon the languages? There is but one human race upon the There is but one human race upon the is but one human race upon the but one human race upon the one human race upon the human race upon the race upon the upon the the specification. For example, the proper noun John specifies earth, and but one language.” (p. 112) and but one language.” (p. 112) but one language.” (p. 112) one language.” (p. 112) language.” (p. 112) (p. 112) 112) 

278 ERIC SVEN RISTAD 

==> picture [354 x 359] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
cP
fe} C1
CO —_ Agr P{S)
fe} Agri
Aer TenseP
| I~
[singular] Tense AgrP(O)
[past] IN
[e] Agrl
Agr VP
[singular] IN
AdvP —- [VP] .
yesterday I~
NP Vi
Tom /™
V NP
|
see Mary
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 3. The underlying structural description of Tom saw Mary yesterday is a partial representation of the language user’s knowledge of morphological dependencies. 

relation between a verb V and its underlying direct object XP is always represented by the complement configuration “LVI V XPJ.” And when the direct object appears as the surface subject, as in the passive, a trace must be used as a place holder for the underlying position of the direct object. Now consider the expression 

indicated by the empty categories “[e¢]” in their specifter positions. “C” is the complementizer morpheme, which is phonologically null (i.e., silent) in declarative expressions. 

Next, the underlying representation in Fig. 3 undergoes certain obligatory movement transformations, resulting in the surface form in Fig. 4. 

First, the underlying object Mary moves to the specifier position of the object agreement phrase, so that the agreement morpheme will be specified [singular] and so that the Object Mary will be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the Mary will be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the will be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the objective case. Next, Tom, the case. Next, Tom, the Next, Tom, the Tom, the the underlying subject of the verbal predicate [ subject of the verbal predicate [ of the verbal predicate [ the verbal predicate [ verbal predicate [ predicate [ [ see Mary], moves Mary], moves moves t© the specifier position of the subject agreement phrase, in the specifier position of the subject agreement phrase, in specifier position of the subject agreement phrase, in position of the subject agreement phrase, in of the subject agreement phrase, in the subject agreement phrase, in subject agreement phrase, in agreement phrase, in phrase, in in Fder to specify the agreement morpheme as to specify the agreement morpheme as specify the agreement morpheme as the agreement morpheme as agreement morpheme as morpheme as as [[[singular]][ and]][[ and]] ' be assigned nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- be assigned nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- assigned nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- case. Finally, the verb see com- Finally, the verb see com- the verb see com- verb see com- see com- comines first with the object agreement morpheme, then with first with the object agreement morpheme, then with with the object agreement morpheme, then with the object agreement morpheme, then with object agreement morpheme, then with agreement morpheme, then with morpheme, then with then with tense morpheme, and finally with the subject agreement morpheme, and finally with the subject agreement and finally with the subject agreement finally with the subject agreement with the subject agreement the subject agreement subject agreement agreement morpheme. It is spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- It is spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- is spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- out as saw. Each movement transfor- as saw. Each movement transfor- saw. Each movement transfor- Each movement transfor- movement transfor- transformation leaves behind an indexed trace. leaves behind an indexed trace. behind an indexed trace. an indexed trace. indexed trace. trace. 

Tom saw Mary yesterday. (4) 

If we examined certain cross-linguistic facts and obeyed the Object Mary will be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the Mary will be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the will be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the be assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the assigned objective case. Next, Tom, the objective case. Next, Tom, the case. Next, Tom, the Next, Tom, the Tom, the the principle of universal explanation, we would assign the underlying subject of the verbal predicate [ subject of the verbal predicate [ of the verbal predicate [ the verbal predicate [ verbal predicate [ predicate [ [ see Mary], moves Mary], moves moves underlying structural description in Fig.3 to this exprest© the specifier position of the subject agreement phrase, in the specifier position of the subject agreement phrase, in specifier position of the subject agreement phrase, in position of the subject agreement phrase, in of the subject agreement phrase, in the subject agreement phrase, in subject agreement phrase, in agreement phrase, in phrase, in in sion. The verb see selects the proper noun Mary as its direct Fder to specify the agreement morpheme as to specify the agreement morpheme as specify the agreement morpheme as the agreement morpheme as agreement morpheme as morpheme as as [[[singular]][ and]][[ and]] object, resulting in a V1 projection. This VI predicate is ' be assigned nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- be assigned nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- assigned nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- nominative case. Finally, the verb see com- case. Finally, the verb see com- Finally, the verb see com- the verb see com- verb see com- see com- comspecified by its subject, the proper noun Tom. The relation ines first with the object agreement morpheme, then with first with the object agreement morpheme, then with with the object agreement morpheme, then with the object agreement morpheme, then with object agreement morpheme, then with agreement morpheme, then with morpheme, then with then with of modification between the resulting VP and the adverb _ the tense morpheme, and finally with the subject agreement morpheme, and finally with the subject agreement and finally with the subject agreement finally with the subject agreement with the subject agreement the subject agreement subject agreement agreement yesterday is represented configurationally as adjunction to morpheme. It is spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- It is spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- is spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- spelled out as saw. Each movement transfor- out as saw. Each movement transfor- as saw. Each movement transfor- saw. Each movement transfor- Each movement transfor- movement transfor- transforVP. The remaining morphemes—object agreement, verbal mation leaves behind an indexed trace. leaves behind an indexed trace. behind an indexed trace. an indexed trace. indexed trace. trace. tense, and subject agreement-——appear in this structural This linguistic analysis is motivated by Chomsky (1986; description, but have not yet been specified. This is 1989) and Pollock (1989). The movement transformations 

COMPLEXITY OF AGREEMENT AND AMBIGUITY 

279 

==> picture [381 x 356] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
CP
le] C1
CO AgrP(S)
Tom » Agri
Agr TenseP
|sin Tense /™
 oN Tense AgrP(O)
[past] FPj | I~
Ising] Vs 5 Mary; AgrlOR
{
see I~
Agr VP
| IN
ty AdvP VP
yesterday I~
NP V1
| I~
t tov NP
||
t3 t I
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 4. The surface form of Tom saw Mary yesterday, the result of repeatedly applying movement transformations to the underlying form in Fig. 3. 

proposed in those works are considerably more complex than those shown here. 

In the next section, we translate this informal observation into a proof that the lexical resolution problem for modern transformational grammars is NP-hard. In brief, the idea of our proof is to translate the formal dependencies among the Boolean variables in a propositional formula into the linguistic dependencies among the lexical items in a structural description. We will perform the translation carefully, so that the lexical items satisfy the linguistic dependencies in the structural description if and only if there is a truth assignment to the Boolean variables that satisfies the propositional formula. Thus, our translation will be a reduction from the NP-complete Satisfiability problem to 

By explicitly representing the dependencies between the morphemes in this fashion, a number of things become clear. For one, each morpheme typically interacts with only a few other morphemes, such as its specifier and its complement. However, because each word consists of several morphemes, it is possible for every word in a clause to interact with every other word in that clause. For example, in our first example (1) John was seen, the passive verb form see+en selects the underlying object ¢,; and assigns it a “patient” thematic role. The underlying object ¢; appears as the surface subject John; the subject ¢; appears as the surface subject John; the subject appears as the surface subject John; the subject as the surface subject John; the subject the surface subject John; the subject John; the subject the subject subject — the lexical resolution problem. agrees with the inflected aspect be + past + singular, which assigns it nominative case; and, to complete the circle of interactions, the inflected aspect was selects the passive verb form. These properties of words, such as case-marking, thematic role assignment, selection, and agreement, are all independent, not directly deducible from the phonological form of the words, and potentially correlated in the lexicon. 

object ¢; appears as the surface subject John; the subject ¢; appears as the surface subject John; the subject appears as the surface subject John; the subject as the surface subject John; the subject the surface subject John; the subject John; the subject the subject subject — the lexical resolution problem. 

4, COMPLEXITY OF LINGUISTIC TRANSFORMS 

In this section we prove that the LRP is NP-hard for any transformational grammar that generates a particular class of structural descriptions. The inspiration for our proof is the fact that lexical entries depend on each-other, by virtue 

280 

ERIC SVEN RISTAD 

of their presence in same structural description. For example, the subject and main verb may be required to agree on number or gender, or the main verb may select an animate object. Such syntactic dependencies are complex, involving the interaction of many local and nonlocal relations. Accordingly, the disambiguation ofa particular word can have global consequences. This Suggests that it may be difficult to assign a structural description to a sequence of ambiguous words. words. ae 

4. Transparent to extraction. U, allows nodes that can be moved out of U,, , to also be moved out of U,. This kind of long movement is typically done by successive cyclic movement between bounding nodes in order to satisfy the subjaceny condition of bounding theory. 

5. Contains a landing site. U, contains a specifier position that is assigned case. The head of U, will agree with its specifier; therefore only stairs that agree with the head of U; can be moved to this specifier position. Correspondingly, ini, means that U, can only move to the specifier position of a stair U,,; j <i, that agrees with it. 

ambiguous words. words. ae Let us begin by thinking of the NP-complete 3-Satisfiabilitystraints. In particular, problem every ( 3SAT) satisfiable as a set Boolean of interacting formula cOn- in 3-conjunctive normal form (CNF) is a string of clauses C,, Cy, .., C, in the variables x, x2, ..., X, that satisfies the following three constraints: (i) negation: a variable x; and its negation X; have opposite truth values; (11) clausal satisfaction: every clause C,;=(a,v6,vc;) contains a true literal (a literal is a variable or its negation); (iii) consistency of truth assignments: every positive literal of a given variable 1s assigned the same truth value, either | or 0. As suggested above, the idea of the proof is to construct a structural description that enforces these 3SAT con- structural description that enforces these 3SAT con- description that enforces these 3SAT con- that enforces these 3SAT con- enforces these 3SAT con- these 3SAT con- 3SAT con- con- ofthe corresponding literal in the Boolean formula. straints. The words in the structural description will be ambiguous with respect to a syntactic distinction that corresponds to truth value. 

The proof will also rely on the existence of four syntactic distinctions, such as gender, number, person, and kinship class. As explained below, these syntactic distinctions will be used to ensure that only lexical items that represent literals of the same variable can agree with each other. They will also be used to represent the underlying truth value of the corresponding formula literal. Consequently, each lexical item in the structural description will be two-ways ambiguous, corresponding to the ambiguity in truth value 

a structural description that enforces these 3SAT con- structural description that enforces these 3SAT con- description that enforces these 3SAT con- that enforces these 3SAT con- enforces these 3SAT con- these 3SAT con- 3SAT con- con- ofthe corresponding literal in the Boolean formula. 

LemMa 4.1. Stairs can enforce the 3SAT constraints. 

Recall that transformation theories postulate at least two levels of syntactic representation—the underlying and surface representations—and a mapping from underlying form to surface form. The underlying form is called the D-structure (DS) and the surface form is called the S-structure (SS). DS is a representation of thematic role assignment, selection, and grammatical function (subject, object, etc.}. SS is the syntactic representation closest to the surface form of a sentence. In current transformational theories, DS is mapped onto SS by the generalized move-« transformation. 

Proof. The idea of the proof is to represent negation as 4 morpheme, to encode the truth values of variables in syntactic features, to enforce clausal satisfaction in the underlying representation (DS) using selectional constraints, and 10 ensure consistency of truth assignments in the surface Tepresentation (SS) using long distance movement and Specifier-head agreement. 

The DS consists of one stair per formula literal, which ts three stairs per formula clause. Let the clause C;:=(a;v4;vc;) be represented by the three stairs U,,, _U;,2, and U, ,: 

The proof will simulate the 3SAT constraints with acomplex syntactic representation, which we will build using one simple building block, called a “stair.” 

==> picture [187 x 101] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
v.
ON
[e]-——— Ui
Qae]- —__U,> (5)
aoa
Le] —— Ui41,4
----- End of picture text -----

DEFINITION. A stair is an underlying form U, with the following properties: 

1. 

Recursive structure. U; contains another stair U,, ,. 

2. Selection and agreement are correlated. U, contains a morpheme yu; that selects U;,,. Local affixation rules will morphologically merge the head of U; with the morpheme H,. thereby correlating selectional properties of #; with the agreement features of U; in the lexicon. 

The selectional constraints of the three stairs ensure that ; ; each 3-clause contains at least one true literal, although lexical ambiguity will prevent us from knowing which literals in the 3-clause are true. To do this, the first stair U,, must promise to make C; true, either by being true itself or by selecting a stair U,, that promises to make the 3-clause true; to fuifill its promise, the second stair U, , must either 

3. Undergoes obligatory movement. U, selects and assigns a theta-role to U;,,, but does not assign it case. Therefore U;,; 1s a properly governed argument that undergoes obligatory movement in order to satisfy the case filter. The same will be true for U,. 

COMPLEXITY OF AGREEMENT AND AMBIGUITY 

281 

==> picture [172 x 204] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Us 6
Len
e| Os
Vow
Leo~
le+-——u>,
[e}+-——Us
len
le+-——u>
henle]
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 5. On the input 3SAT instance DS f= (x,,X5.x3), (7, X5s Xs), the struction. is created to representf Each literal in fis represented bya stair conby For example, the first literal of the first clause, x,, is represented the outermost stair construction, U,,. Selectional constraints are enforced at DS. They ensure that every Boolean clause contains a true literal. 

be true or select a true stair U; .. (If U;, , 1s true, it selects the othat i 2 ih either truth value.) This chain of Serene CPEnaencies 1s 

==> picture [208 x 76] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Uig true
Uig true
Uig false (6)
Ciaif ° talalse ————- otU;. .mome
----- End of picture text -----

variableAffixes listed in the lexicon will negate or preserve ponding truth values, according to whether the corresThen, scanningformula literal from is right to negative left, or each positive. stair is moved to the specifier position of the closest stair of the same variable, either by long movement or by successive cyclic movement (see Figs. 6 and 7). 

In the resulting SS, the specifier position of the stair that corresponds to th occurrence of a given variable contains the stair that corresponds to the i+ 1th occurrence of the same variable. These two stairs agree with each other by specifier-head agreement. Now all the stairs that correspond to literals of a given variable are contained in the specifier position of the stair that corresponds to first occurrence of that variable {see Fig. 7). 

Now all variables have consistent truth assignments, by specifier—headliteral. by DS agreement selection.. Negation at SS.. All is‘ clauses performed contain by affixes. a true The formula is satisfiable if and only if the corresponding DS and SS are well-formed. J 

==> picture [149 x 175] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Usa
Len
e| Ur
Lew
Lon
Ug>—Up,
Us)
[> Ss
te.
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 6. This depicts the first movement transformation that is applied in the mapping of the e in Fig. ° to the SS in Fig. 7. The innermost need Pele °aa the ased inf) moves tonne specifier po hsncteg the “irdOn relates hte (Ui, the x, )s hteral literal 0 © thef hind Becone a ae colean Bae clauseis movement[to][ the][ x3] elliteral o atthe the first Boolean clause. Now bot | Stairs agree, by specifier—head agreement; therefore, the corresponding literals of the formula variable x, will be assigned the same truth value, even though they appear in different clauses. 

Using the construction in Lemma 4.1 and the fact that words may be ambiguous, we can now prove the following theorem about the lexical resolution problem: 

THEOREM 1. The LRP is NP-hard in linguistic theories that permit a stair. 

formulaProof. f in. By 3~CNF; reduction the output to 3SAT. is. a The lexicon input. L is and a Booleana structurein Scan S containing be found in underspecified L if and only words iffis satisfiable. such that The the words structure S will be built fromfaccording to the stair construction in Lemma 4.1. Two stairs will agree if and only if they 

==> picture [104 x 118] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
y
ia
DN
Us-— Up;
ae .
/2\ DN
te, “Ugy —U;.,
Ze ts
tg. Ug: tga
----- End of picture text -----

mentFIG. transformations 7,ers This1§shows show tothe the SS€ DS that depictedat reresults fromS inIr Fig.Tepeatedly 5. Specifier-headrepeatedlyapplyingapplying agree-mmovement is enforced at SS. This ensures that all instances of a variable are assigned the same truth value. 

480/39/3-3 

282 

* ERIC SVEN RISTAD 

correspond to literals of the same variable and have been assigned the same truth value. The words in the syntactic structure will be ambiguous only in the syntactic distinction that corresponds to truth value. One agreement feature encodes variable truth assignments, and another identifies Boolean variables. One nonagreement feature encodes literal truth values, and a second one keeps track of the promise in the chain of selectional dependencies shown in (6). Thus a total of four syntactic distinctions are required and each lexical item is two-ways ambiguous. The stair construction ensures that the 3SAT constraints are satisfied by all permissible lexical choices for the words. J 

models. Henceforth, we will refer to the transformational theory of Chomsky (1986) as the “Barriers model” and the theory of Lasnik & Saito (1984) as the “Lasnik—Saito model”. 

; LEMMA 5-1. The Barriers model generates a stair construction. 

Proof. The noun complement structure depicted in Fig. 8 is a stair according to the Barriers model of Chomsky (1986), (The definition of a stair appears in Section 4.) 

1. Recursive structure. NP, contains NP;,,, the next stair. 

TheWe have just finished the second stage of our analysis. first stage was to motivate the structural descriptions postulated by modern transformational grammars. The second stage was to exhibit an abstract class of structural stage was to exhibit an abstract class of structural was to exhibit an abstract class of structural to exhibit an abstract class of structural exhibit an abstract class of structural an abstract class of structural abstract class of structural class of structural of structural structural | appear on the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- on the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- inflected verb by specifier-head agree- verb by specifier-head agree- by specifier-head agree- specifier-head agreedescriptions, called stairs, that support an intricate web of syntactic dependencies. The third and final stage 1S tO dependencies. The third and final stage 1S tO The third and final stage 1S tO third and final stage 1S tO and final stage 1S tO final stage 1S tO stage 1S tO 1S tO tO hs selectional properties in the lexicon. demonstrate exactly how these structural descriptions appear in the transformational grammars of Chomsky (1986) and Lasnik & Saito (1984), 

a verbal2. Selection morpheme and agreement v0 that selects are correlated. NP,,,. V0NP, undergoes contains obligatory head movement to the inflectional element 10, creating an inflected verb in the head of IP. The ¢-features appear on the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- on the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- inflected verb by specifier-head agree- verb by specifier-head agree- by specifier-head agree- specifier-head agreement, where they may be systematically correlated with the 

second stage was to exhibit an abstract class of structural stage was to exhibit an abstract class of structural was to exhibit an abstract class of structural to exhibit an abstract class of structural exhibit an abstract class of structural an abstract class of structural abstract class of structural class of structural of structural structural | appear on the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- on the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- the inflected verb by specifier-head agree- inflected verb by specifier-head agree- verb by specifier-head agree- by specifier-head agree- specifier-head agree- 

syntactic dependencies. The third and final stage 1S tO dependencies. The third and final stage 1S tO The third and final stage 1S tO third and final stage 1S tO and final stage 1S tO final stage 1S tO stage 1S tO 1S tO tO hs selectional properties in the lexicon. 

3: Undergoes obligatory movement. VO selects and assigns a theta-role to NP; ,;, but does not assign it case. Therefore NP, ; must move. This is possible if VO has lost its ability to assign case due to passive morphology or if NP,,, 1s the underlying subject of VP,, as in standard VP-internal subject analyses. 

§. COMPLEXITY OF AGREEMENT INTERACTIONS 

In this section, we demonstrate that the transformational theories of Chomsky (1986) and Lasnik & Saito (1984) generate stair constructions. This demonstration suffices to prove the NP-hardness of the LRP for those theories. In turn, this proof will give us reason to believe that the interactionof lexical ambiguity and syntactic agreement—such as specifier-_ head agreement, head~head agreement, head-projection agreement, and the various forms of chain agreement (link, extension, composition)—can be quite complex in these 

4. Transparent to extraction. In Barriers, blocking categories (BCs) stop unbounded application of move-a. Informally, a BC is a category not theta-marked bya lexical X0. For example, matrix verb phrases are BCs because they are selected by the nonlexical category 10 (inflection) without being assigned a theta-role. Unbounded A-movement becomes possible when a category is moved local steps, adjoining to intermediate nonargument positions before moving on (adjunction is typically to BCs). 

In our noun complement construction (Fig. 8), NP; can be moved out of NP;. VP is a BC and a barrier for NP; , ; because it is not L-marked, but NP; , , can adjoin to the nonargument VP and void its barrierhood because nonarguments may be freely adjoined to. Both NP; and IP; are L-marked and therefore are neither BCs nor barriers for further NP, , ; raising.specifier-of-IP Thus, NP,;,, position can [e be] A-movedwithout violating to any the c-commandingECP because all traces are | d - properly governed (both theta-governed by the verb V that selects NP;, ,, and y-marked (antecedent-governed) by the deleted trace adjoined to VP). 

==> picture [194 x 173] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
NP,
/~™
{e] N1
/—~
No Ip
I~
(el
n
I~
10
vP
J~
fe} V1
/™~
vo NP,
----- End of picture text -----

Reinhart (personal communication) suggests a similar, albeit marginal, natural example where an NP containing an argument trace is topicalized to CP specifier from an L-marked position: 

(1986),FIG. This 8 isA thestair phraseconstruction structure thatfor the ‘wouldBarriers be assigned| ‘o noun ’ What burning: fi 1]: did: John say [of what book J ;+1 complement constructions, such as desire to visit places. [t; would be magnificent] (7) 

. 

COMPLEXITY OF AGREEMENT AND AMBIGUITY 

283 

Chomsky (personal communication) suggests that the proper analysis of (7) is 

==> picture [226 x 27] <==

and that a better topicalization example is 

What burning did John say (that) of that book, Mary thought would be magnificent y 8 8 

==> picture [13 x 16] <==

§. Contains a landing site. The internal IP, contains a 7 - . ._ a specifier position (landing site) that will agree with I0 by specifier-head agreement in nonlexical categories; the . 7 : . specifier position will also agree with NO (the head of NP,) by predication. Alternately, head movement from VO to I0 to NO can create an inflected noun “[{V [] NJ” in the XO position of NP, that will agree with the landing site Although itos is difficultach to find a natural example of such an‘ inflected noun, no arguments or analyses exclude it in prin ciple. A close natural example is noun incorporation in Mohawk verbs (Baker, 1985, p. 139) , »P. ; 

This establishes that the noun complement construction in Fig. 8 is a stair in the Barriers model. J 

Tueorem 2. The LRP is NP-hard in Barriers model 

Proof. The proof follows from Lemma 5.1 and Theorem 1 above. The lexicon contains ambiguous inflected nouns “((V I] NJ” that have undergone verbal incorporation. | 

Ristad (1988, pp. 22-28) contains a direct proof of Theorem 2, with all the details explicitly worked out. 

THEOREM 3. The LRP is NP-hard in the Lasnik—Saito model 

Proof. The preceding proof proceeds without alteration in the Lasnik-Saito (1984) model because in that model, theta-zovernment& suffices for pproper government. and ; traces P & ? may be deleted after y-marking. J 

movementWe note by that the adjunction possibility to intermediate of long-distance positions argument remains in more recent proposals based on the Barriers model. One such proposal, due to Chomsky (1989), is that derivations be subject to a “least effort principle,” with the following provisos. LF. permits only the following five elements: : . . arguments, adjuncts, lexical elements, predicates, and; operator-variable constructions. Affect-alpha must apply at LF to each illegitimate object to yield one of these five legitimate elements. Chomsky (1989, p. 63) urges us to “consider successive-cyclic A-bar movement from an argument position._ Thiswm will yield a chain° that 1S, not a legitimate-_ object; it is a ‘heterogeneous chain,’ consisting of an adjunct 

chain and an (A-bar, A) pair (an operator-variable construction, where the A-bar position is occupied bya trace). This heterogeneous chain can become a legitimate object, namely a genuine operator-variable construction, only by eliminating intermediate A-bar traces. We conclude, then, that these must be deleted at the point where we reach LF representation.” 

A direct consequence of this theory, then, is that successive-cyclic A-bar movement from a theta-marked argument position to a case-marked argument position will also yield an illegitimate object, which can become a legitimate object, namely an A-chain, only by eliminating intermediate A-bar traces at the point where we reach LF (that is, before LF chain conditions apply). We conclude, then, that these . ; PPIY?° 2 intermediate traces must be deleted at that point and that long-distance NP movement is in fact permitted by the hens P y y- . This concludes our demonstration that modern transformatitna” o nal Bragrammarsts generagenera t e thehe 8stair constructconstruction. The. central point of our work is not that these linguistic theories are computationally profligate, but that the linguistwc phenomena of syntactic agreement and lexical ambiguity inherently cause intractability. Thus, we are arguing that the true problem of language comprehension is itself computationally complex and that an adequate theory of language must inherit that intractability (Ristad, 1993). 

REFERENCE 

FE CES 

Baker, M. (1985) incorporation: A theory ofgrammaticalfunction changing. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Barton, G. E., Berwick, R., & Ristad, E. (1987). Computational compiexity and natural language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Beattie, J. (1788). The theery of language. Menston, England: The Scolar Press Limited. (English Linguistics 1500-1806 Collection, No. 88,} Berwick, R. (1982). Computational complexity and lexical functional grammar. American Journal of Computational Linguistics 8, 97-109. Bresnan, J. (Ed.). (1982). The mentaf representation of grammatical relations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. _ Chomsky, N. (1956). Three models for the description of language. L.R.E. Transations on information Theory, IT-2, (13-124. Reprinted, with corrections, in R. D, Luce, R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Readings in ChomaChomsky, N.nN U1986 (1989).Pe Some notes Cantrides on economy MAWie of derivation oe and representation. In MIT working papers in linguistics (Vol. 10). pp. 43-74. Garey, M., & Johnson, D. (1970). Computers and intractabitity. New York: Freeman. 

Gazdar, G., Klein, E., Pullum, G., & Sag, I. (1985). Generalized phrase vonstructure Herder, grammar, J. G. (1827). Treatise Oxford, UK: upon Blackwell. the origin of language. London: Camberwell Press. Lasnik, H. & Saito, M. (1984). On the nature of proper government. Linguistic Inquiry 18, 235-289. Mahajan, A. K. (1989). Agreement and agreement phrases. In MJT Pollard,workingpapers C., & Sag, in linguistics I. (1987). Information-based syntax (Vol. 10}. pp. 217-252. and semantics. Standford: CSLI Lecture Notes. 

284 

ERIC SVEN RISTAD 

Pollock, J-Y. (1989). Verb movement, universal grammar, and the Ristad, E. (1993). The language complexity game. Cambridge, MA: MIT structure of [P. Linguistic Inquiry 20(3), 365-424. Press, Ristad, E. (1988). Complexity of human language comprehension. Ristad, E., Berwick, R. (1989). Computational consequences of agreement Unpublished manuscript, Al Memo 964. MIT Artificial Intelligence and ambiguity in natural languages. Journal of Mathematical Lab, Cambridge, MA. Psychology 33, 379-396. Ristad,and Philosophy E. (1990). Computational 13, 521-587. structure of GPSG models. Linguistics Received: January 24, 1991 ; 

