10.1006/jmps.1995.1036
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 39, 383-395 (1995) 

A Mapping Model of Bow Effects in Absolute Identification* 

Yves LACOUTURE 

Université Laval 

AND 

A. A. J. Margery? 

McGill University 

EEE 

sensory dimension, people are usually only able to identify the stimuli up to an accuracy that corresponds to correctly identifying about seven stimuli. An early paper on these topics is by Miller (1956). The importance of that paper, os and of the topics it covers, can be measured by the fact that It is one of the papers selected for inclusion, with discussion, in the special issue of Psychological Review to celebrate the 100th anniversary of that journal. The discussion paper is by Shiffrin & Nosofsky (1994) and can be consulted for details on theory and data relevant to the topic of the Current paper. 

We propose that the intriguing bow effects in choice probabilities and response times that are found in unidimensional absolute identification might be a consequence of the mapping process required when a unidimensional psychological representation is mapped to a muitidimensional response vector. This idea builds on previous work by Lacouture & Marley (1991) which modeled absolute identification using a connectionist feed-forward network. A formal solution of the so-called “encoder problem” is the basis of the approach, and the inclusion in the model of “noisy” mappings and integrators allows us to mode! both the responses made and the time to make them. The simulated model reproduces several of the phenomenon in unidimensional absolute identification including bow, range, and some sequential effects. © 1995 Academic Press, Inc. 

Although our results in this paper address the abovemeetin issue of the basic limits on absolute identification issue of the basic limits on absolute identification of the basic limits on absolute identification the basic limits on absolute identification basic limits on absolute identification limits on absolute identification on absolute identification absolute identification identification performance, our major focus is on a second set of phenomena referred to variously as the end-anchor effect, the bow effect, and sometimes the serial position effect. These terms refer to the fact that the stimuli at the end of the presented range in an absolute identification experiment are normally more accurately identified than are the other stimuli in the experiment. Figures 5 and 6 show typical results along these lines for various set sizes. Note that there is a possible confounding between effects due to stimuli being at the end of the sensory range and effects due to the at the end of the sensory range and effects due to the the end of the sensory range and effects due to the end of the sensory range and effects due to the of the sensory range and effects due to the the sensory range and effects due to the sensory range and effects due to the range and effects due to the and effects due to the effects due to the due to the to the the “correct” responses for those stimuli being at the end of the response range. To our knowledge, no-one has satisfactorily resolved this issue, nor the related one concerning the corresponding response time phenomenon. Reaction times showa related bow effect, with the responses at the end of the response range being faster (on average) than those away from the end of the response range. A possible confounding factor here is that the response mechanism is often . a keyboard, and possibly responses at the end of the keyboard can be produced faster than those toward the middle of the keyboard. This is unlikely to be the complete explanation because in tasks such as the identification of digits, this end effect in response time is significantly . . . reduced, often to the extent of being effectively nonexistent. But, of course, the digit identification task is overlearned, with perfect performance in terms of response made, so it is 

T— SUmeetin issue of the basic limits on absolute identification issue of the basic limits on absolute identification of the basic limits on absolute identification the basic limits on absolute identification basic limits on absolute identification limits on absolute identification on absolute identification absolute identification identification 

$e 

1. INTRODUCTION 

A typical absolute identification experiment involves a set of N stimuli that vary along some unidimensional psychological continuum. On each trial of the experiment, one of the N stimuli is presented, and the subject is required to identify it by selecting the previously specified unique “correct” response for that stimulus. The possible responses are usually key presses, the keys being associated with the usually key presses, the keys being associated with the key presses, the keys being associated with the presses, the keys being associated with the the keys being associated with the keys being associated with the being associated with the associated with the with the the _ being at the end of the sensory range and effects due to the at the end of the sensory range and effects due to the the end of the sensory range and effects due to the end of the sensory range and effects due to the of the sensory range and effects due to the the sensory range and effects due to the sensory range and effects due to the range and effects due to the and effects due to the effects due to the due to the to the the numbers | through N, and with the usual order of the numbers being in agreement with the order of the stimuli according to their magnitudes on the psychological dimension. One of the major phenomena in this area, and probably the one that leads to researchers’ fascination with it, is that no matter how widely spread the stimuli are on the relevant 

are usually key presses, the keys being associated with the usually key presses, the keys being associated with the key presses, the keys being associated with the presses, the keys being associated with the the keys being associated with the keys being associated with the being associated with the associated with the with the the _ being at the end of the sensory range and effects due to the at the end of the sensory range and effects due to the the end of the sensory range and effects due to the end of the sensory range and effects due to the of the sensory range and effects due to the the sensory range and effects due to the sensory range and effects due to the range and effects due to the and effects due to the effects due to the due to the to the the 

_ Correspondence and reprint requests should be sent to Yves Lacouture, Ecole de Psychologie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada G1K 7P4. E-mail: yves@psy.ulaval.ca. 

* This work was supported in part by research and equipment grants to each author from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, an F.CAR. (Québec) new researcher grant to the first author, and an F.C.A.R. (Québec) team grant to both authors. 

We thank Tom Wallsten, Rich Shiffrin, and two anonymous reviewers for their careful reviews and constructive criticism of an earlier version of this paper. 

* E-mail: tony@hebb.psych.megill.ca. 

0022-2496/95 $12.00 Copyright © 1995 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 

383 

384 

LACOUTURE AND MARLEY 

not clear how relevant the associated response time data are to the issue at hand. 

frequently at those positions; however, they give no reasons why this should be the case. 

Numerous explanations for these choice and response Other work on sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead work on sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead on sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead effects by Ward & Lockhead by Ward & Lockhead Ward & Lockhead & Lockhead Lockhead time data have been attempted, with the majority focusing (1970, 1971) and by Mori (1989) support the idea that the 1971) and by Mori (1989) support the idea that the and by Mori (1989) support the idea that the by Mori (1989) support the idea that the Mori (1989) support the idea that the (1989) support the idea that the support the idea that the the idea that the idea that the that the the on the choice data. Again, Shiffrin & Nosofsky (1994) give response process is the limiting factor in absolute identifica- process is the limiting factor in absolute identifica- is the limiting factor in absolute identifica- the limiting factor in absolute identifica- limiting factor in absolute identifica- in absolute identifica- absolute identifica- identificareferences to, and briefly discuss, much of this work. For tion. The subjects in Mori’s experiments performed absolute The subjects in Mori’s experiments performed absolute subjects in Mori’s experiments performed absolute in Mori’s experiments performed absolute Mori’s experiments performed absolute experiments performed absolute performed absolute absolute instance, one suggestion has been that the phenomena are identification of line segments under various conditions in of line segments under various conditions in line segments under various conditions in segments under various conditions in under various conditions in various conditions in conditions in in due to some response bias or to the limited number of which the available stimulus information was manipulated the available stimulus information was manipulated available stimulus information was manipulated stimulus information was manipulated information was manipulated was manipulated manipulated response alternatives available toward the ends of the range. by placing plastic sheets of various translucency over the placing plastic sheets of various translucency over the plastic sheets of various translucency over the sheets of various translucency over the of various translucency over the various translucency over the over the the However, results using sensitivity measures such as the d’ screen on which the stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results on which the stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results the stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results were displayed. Mori’s results displayed. Mori’s results Mori’s results results measures in Fig. 6 strongly suggest that this explanation is show that when available stimulus information is decreased, that when available stimulus information is decreased, when available stimulus information is decreased, available stimulus information is decreased, stimulus information is decreased, information is decreased, is decreased, decreased, not correct. Other relevant data appear in Braida & subjects rely more heavily on information from the previous rely more heavily on information from the previous more heavily on information from the previous heavily on information from the previous on information from the previous information from the previous from the previous the previous previous Durlach (1972), Berliner, Durlach, & Braida (1977), and trials in such a way that the amount of information trans- in such a way that the amount of information trans- such a way that the amount of information trans- way that the amount of information trans- that the amount of information trans- the amount of information trans- amount of information trans- of information trans- information trans- transLuce, Nosofsky, Green, & Smith (1982). Furthermore, the mitted from the current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and from the current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and the current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and stimulus, the previous stimulus, and the previous stimulus, and previous stimulus, and stimulus, and and effects are observed even when the pairwise discriminability the previous response to the current response, remains fixed previous response to the current response, remains fixed response to the current response, remains fixed to the current response, remains fixed the current response, remains fixed current response, remains fixed remains fixed fixed among stimuli is perfect, and extensive practice brings at at approximately 2.5 bits independent of the difficulty of the approximately 2.5 bits independent of the difficulty of the 2.5 bits independent of the difficulty of the bits independent of the difficulty of the independent of the difficulty of the of the difficulty of the the difficulty of the difficulty of the of the the best slight performance improvement. Other (Thurstonian) task. This result agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) This result agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) result agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) & Lockhead’s (1970) Lockhead’s (1970) (1970) explanations involve motivating the assumption that “law of psychophysical judgment”, which states that perfor- of psychophysical judgment”, which states that perfor- psychophysical judgment”, which states that perfor- judgment”, which states that perfor- which states that perfor- states that perfor- that perfor- perforstimulus representations (and possibly response criteria} are mance depends on the available information and that, when depends on the available information and that, when on the available information and that, when the available information and that, when available information and that, when information and that, when and that, when that, when when not independent of the relative position of a stimulus in the the available stimulus information is limited, subjects use available stimulus information is limited, subjects use stimulus information is limited, subjects use information is limited, subjects use is limited, subjects use limited, subjects use subjects use use stimulus set, of the set of stimuli used, or of the range of information from prior stimuli and responses. In a condi- from prior stimuli and responses. In a condi- prior stimuli and responses. In a condi- stimuli and responses. In a condi- and responses. In a condi- responses. In a condi- In a condi- condistimuli used. For instance, Durlach & Braida (1969) and tion of pure guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are of pure guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are pure guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are where no (discriminable) stimuli are no (discriminable) stimuli are (discriminable) stimuli are stimuli are are Gravetter & Lockhead (1973) propose scaling processes presented, the subjects still process the same amount of the subjects still process the same amount of subjects still process the same amount of still process the same amount of process the same amount of the same amount of same amount of amount of of whereby the variance of the assumed distribution of the information but it 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, but it 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, it 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, all accounted for by sequential effects, accounted for by sequential effects, for by sequential effects, by sequential effects, sequential effects, effects, stimulus representation is proportional to the square of the _ that is, by dependencies on previous responses. signal range. However, such explanations do not cover bow Turning to our own work, in this paper we present matheffects. To handle the latter, Berliner & Durlach (1973) and ematical results motivated by our earlter simulations Braida, Lim, Berliner, Durlach, Rabinowitz, & Purks (Lacouture & Marley, 1991) and then present simulations (1984) propose that the end stimuli are used as anchors, or based on these new results. Our new model accounts for comparison points, with the psychological representation of both the choices made and the time to make them, and we stimuli further away from the anchors being more variable. are able to show that bow effects are “natural” consequences Marley & Cook (1984, 1986) develop similar ideas based on of our proposed response selection mechanism. Our model an assumption of a limited processing capacity (which they differs from other models of bow effects in that in our call rehearsal), and they show that Braida et a/’s (1984) approach these effects are not based on explicit anchor model is a special case of their model. The Marley and Cook mechanisms or on different representations across the model makes good predictions of accuracy for individual — stimulus range, but rather they follow from a “noisy” mapstimuli as a function of set size, ordinal position, and some ping between the unidimensional stimulus representation (but not all) sequential dependencies; however, it does not and a multidimensional response representation. deal with response time. There are many other excellent The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section of the paper is as follows. In the next section the paper is as follows. In the next section paper is as follows. In the next section is as follows. In the next section as follows. In the next section follows. In the next section In the next section the next section next section section theoretical developments along similar lines, including we suggest that the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful suggest that the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful that the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful so-called “encoder problem” is a useful “encoder problem” is a useful problem” is a useful is a useful a useful useful Baird (1995), Johnson (1991), Laming (1984), Murdock format! instantiation of instantiation of of a unidimensional absolute identifica- unidimensional absolute identifica- absolute identifica- identifica(1960), Treisman & Faulkner (1984), and Treisman (1985). tion task. We then present a general solution to the encoder task. We then present a general solution to the encoder We then present a general solution to the encoder then present a general solution to the encoder present a general solution to the encoder a general solution to the encoder general solution to the encoder solution to the encoder to the encoder the encoder encoder Sequential effects and the theoretical explanations that problem using a feed-forward network with one hidden unit using a feed-forward network with one hidden unit a feed-forward network with one hidden unit feed-forward network with one hidden unit network with one hidden unit with one hidden unit one hidden unit hidden unit unit they suggest are also very important in this area. Luce, anda maximum-selecting output network. We next present maximum-selecting output network. We next present output network. We next present network. We next present We next present next present present Green, & Weber (1976), Weber, Green, & Luce (1977), and two different parametrizations of the genera! solution, each different parametrizations of the genera! solution, each parametrizations of the genera! solution, each the genera! solution, each genera! solution, each solution, each each Luce et al. (1982) report studies showing that the bow effect developed independently by one of the authors. The general independently by one of the authors. The general by one of the authors. The general one of the authors. The general of the authors. The general the authors. The general authors. The general The general general (in choices) can be influenced by sequential dependencies in solution is then expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic is then expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic then expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic to incorporate noisy and dynamic incorporate noisy and dynamic noisy and dynamic and dynamic dynamic the stimulus presentations across trials. These authors (real time) processing. Next we report simulation results time) processing. Next we report simulation results processing. Next we report simulation results Next we report simulation results we report simulation results report simulation results simulation results results explain these effects by assuming that subjects tend to focus showing some properties of the model, and the performance some properties of the model, and the performance properties of the model, and the performance of the model, and the performance the model, and the performance model, and the performance and the performance the performance performance their “attention” in a subregion of the psychological space of the model is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- the model is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- model is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- evaluated against data in terms of its predic- against data in terms of its predic- data in terms of its predic- in terms of its predic- terms of its predic- of its predic- its predic- predicthat includes the stimulus presented on the previous trial, tions for choices made and time to make them. Finally, revi- for choices made and time to make them. Finally, revi- choices made and time to make them. Finally, revi- made and time to make them. Finally, revi- and time to make them. Finally, revi- time to make them. Finally, revi- to make them. Finally, revi- make them. Finally, revi- them. Finally, revi- Finally, revi- revithus locally improving performance. These authors also sions are made to the model to account for some sequential are made to the model to account for some sequential made to the model to account for some sequential to the model to account for some sequential the model to account for some sequential model to account for some sequential to account for some sequential account for some sequential for some sequential some sequential sequential suggest that performance is better at the ends of the range effects, and we end by suggesting directions for future and we end by suggesting directions for future we end by suggesting directions for future end by suggesting directions for future by suggesting directions for future suggesting directions for future directions for future for future future because subjects tend to allocate their attention more theoretical work. work. 

Other work on sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead work on sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead on sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead sequential effects by Ward & Lockhead effects by Ward & Lockhead by Ward & Lockhead Ward & Lockhead & Lockhead Lockhead (1970, 1971) and by Mori (1989) support the idea that the 1971) and by Mori (1989) support the idea that the and by Mori (1989) support the idea that the by Mori (1989) support the idea that the Mori (1989) support the idea that the (1989) support the idea that the support the idea that the the idea that the idea that the that the the response process is the limiting factor in absolute identifica- process is the limiting factor in absolute identifica- is the limiting factor in absolute identifica- the limiting factor in absolute identifica- limiting factor in absolute identifica- in absolute identifica- absolute identifica- identification. The subjects in Mori’s experiments performed absolute The subjects in Mori’s experiments performed absolute subjects in Mori’s experiments performed absolute in Mori’s experiments performed absolute Mori’s experiments performed absolute experiments performed absolute performed absolute absolute identification of line segments under various conditions in of line segments under various conditions in line segments under various conditions in segments under various conditions in under various conditions in various conditions in conditions in in which the available stimulus information was manipulated the available stimulus information was manipulated available stimulus information was manipulated stimulus information was manipulated information was manipulated was manipulated manipulated by placing plastic sheets of various translucency over the placing plastic sheets of various translucency over the plastic sheets of various translucency over the sheets of various translucency over the of various translucency over the various translucency over the over the the screen on which the stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results on which the stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results the stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results stimuli were displayed. Mori’s results were displayed. Mori’s results displayed. Mori’s results Mori’s results results show that when available stimulus information is decreased, that when available stimulus information is decreased, when available stimulus information is decreased, available stimulus information is decreased, stimulus information is decreased, information is decreased, is decreased, decreased, subjects rely more heavily on information from the previous rely more heavily on information from the previous more heavily on information from the previous heavily on information from the previous on information from the previous information from the previous from the previous the previous previous trials in such a way that the amount of information trans- in such a way that the amount of information trans- such a way that the amount of information trans- way that the amount of information trans- that the amount of information trans- the amount of information trans- amount of information trans- of information trans- information trans- transmitted from the current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and from the current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and the current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and current stimulus, the previous stimulus, and stimulus, the previous stimulus, and the previous stimulus, and previous stimulus, and stimulus, and and the previous response to the current response, remains fixed previous response to the current response, remains fixed response to the current response, remains fixed to the current response, remains fixed the current response, remains fixed current response, remains fixed remains fixed fixed at approximately 2.5 bits independent of the difficulty of the approximately 2.5 bits independent of the difficulty of the 2.5 bits independent of the difficulty of the bits independent of the difficulty of the independent of the difficulty of the of the difficulty of the the difficulty of the difficulty of the of the the task. This result agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) This result agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) result agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) agrees with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) with Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) Ward & Lockhead’s (1970) & Lockhead’s (1970) Lockhead’s (1970) (1970) “law of psychophysical judgment”, which states that perfor- of psychophysical judgment”, which states that perfor- psychophysical judgment”, which states that perfor- judgment”, which states that perfor- which states that perfor- states that perfor- that perfor- performance depends on the available information and that, when depends on the available information and that, when on the available information and that, when the available information and that, when available information and that, when information and that, when and that, when that, when when the available stimulus information is limited, subjects use available stimulus information is limited, subjects use stimulus information is limited, subjects use information is limited, subjects use is limited, subjects use limited, subjects use subjects use use information from prior stimuli and responses. In a condi- from prior stimuli and responses. In a condi- prior stimuli and responses. In a condi- stimuli and responses. In a condi- and responses. In a condi- responses. In a condi- In a condi- condition of pure guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are of pure guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are pure guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are guessing, where no (discriminable) stimuli are where no (discriminable) stimuli are no (discriminable) stimuli are (discriminable) stimuli are stimuli are are presented, the subjects still process the same amount of the subjects still process the same amount of subjects still process the same amount of still process the same amount of process the same amount of the same amount of same amount of amount of of information but it 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, but it 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, it 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, 1s all accounted for by sequential effects, all accounted for by sequential effects, accounted for by sequential effects, for by sequential effects, by sequential effects, sequential effects, effects, 

The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section of the paper is as follows. In the next section the paper is as follows. In the next section paper is as follows. In the next section is as follows. In the next section as follows. In the next section follows. In the next section In the next section the next section next section section we suggest that the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful suggest that the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful that the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful the so-called “encoder problem” is a useful so-called “encoder problem” is a useful “encoder problem” is a useful problem” is a useful is a useful a useful useful format! instantiation of instantiation of of a unidimensional absolute identifica- unidimensional absolute identifica- absolute identifica- identification task. We then present a general solution to the encoder task. We then present a general solution to the encoder We then present a general solution to the encoder then present a general solution to the encoder present a general solution to the encoder a general solution to the encoder general solution to the encoder solution to the encoder to the encoder the encoder encoder problem using a feed-forward network with one hidden unit using a feed-forward network with one hidden unit a feed-forward network with one hidden unit feed-forward network with one hidden unit network with one hidden unit with one hidden unit one hidden unit hidden unit unit anda maximum-selecting output network. We next present maximum-selecting output network. We next present output network. We next present network. We next present We next present next present present two different parametrizations of the genera! solution, each different parametrizations of the genera! solution, each parametrizations of the genera! solution, each the genera! solution, each genera! solution, each solution, each each developed independently by one of the authors. The general independently by one of the authors. The general by one of the authors. The general one of the authors. The general of the authors. The general the authors. The general authors. The general The general general solution is then expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic is then expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic then expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic expanded to incorporate noisy and dynamic to incorporate noisy and dynamic incorporate noisy and dynamic noisy and dynamic and dynamic dynamic (real time) processing. Next we report simulation results time) processing. Next we report simulation results processing. Next we report simulation results Next we report simulation results we report simulation results report simulation results simulation results results showing some properties of the model, and the performance some properties of the model, and the performance properties of the model, and the performance of the model, and the performance the model, and the performance model, and the performance and the performance the performance performance of the model is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- the model is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- model is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- is evaluated against data in terms of its predic- evaluated against data in terms of its predic- against data in terms of its predic- data in terms of its predic- in terms of its predic- terms of its predic- of its predic- its predic- predictions for choices made and time to make them. Finally, revi- for choices made and time to make them. Finally, revi- choices made and time to make them. Finally, revi- made and time to make them. Finally, revi- and time to make them. Finally, revi- time to make them. Finally, revi- to make them. Finally, revi- make them. Finally, revi- them. Finally, revi- Finally, revi- revisions are made to the model to account for some sequential are made to the model to account for some sequential made to the model to account for some sequential to the model to account for some sequential the model to account for some sequential model to account for some sequential to account for some sequential account for some sequential for some sequential some sequential sequential effects, and we end by suggesting directions for future and we end by suggesting directions for future we end by suggesting directions for future end by suggesting directions for future by suggesting directions for future suggesting directions for future directions for future for future future theoretical work. work. 

BOW EFFECTS IN ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

385 

2. A“NEURAL” MODEL OF UNDIMENSIONAL ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

==> picture [157 x 154] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Integrators
E
aw Output Units
&3
38
2g Cee
2,
3 Hidden Unit
2
L>
Input
----- End of picture text -----

We first discuss the so-called encoder problem, which has been suggested asa simple benchmark task for the study of theoretical and simulation results on neural networks (Ackley, Hinton, & Sejnowsky, 1985; Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986) and which we have previously interpreted—in its “noisy” form—as a framework for modeling absolute identification tasks with unidimensional stimuli (Lacouture & Marley, 1991). 

The network for the “N bit encoder problem” consists of L> N input units, V output units, and M <N hidden units. For Input the task to be of any interest, M should be “significantly” less than N. At any given time, exactly one input unit is “on” FIG. 1. 1. Schematic representation of the model. representation of the model. of the model. the model. model. Activation spreads and the task for the network is to turn “on” the correforward from input to hidden unit to output units and from input to hidden unit to output units and input to hidden unit to output units and to hidden unit to output units and hidden unit to output units and unit to output units and output units and units and and is accumulated ina sponding output unit. For now, we restrict our attention to _ set of parallel integrators that race to reach threshold. networks composed entirely of linear units. Early simulation results based on the back-propagation learning algo}yman data—simulations with more than data—simulations with more than with more than more than than one hidden unit, rithm were driven by the assumption that in a three-layer even in the noisy case, give performance in the noisy case, give performance the noisy case, give performance noisy case, give performance case, give performance give performance performance much superior to feed-forward network log, N hidden units are necessary to human data (Lacouture & Marley, 1991). data (Lacouture & Marley, 1991). (Lacouture & Marley, 1991). & Marley, 1991). Marley, 1991). 1991). solve the N bit encoder problem. Although back-propagaThe activity value in the hidden unit is activity value in the hidden unit is value in the hidden unit is in the hidden unit is the hidden unit is hidden unit is unit is is then mapped by a tion will not normally find the solution when the network is set of N (possibly different) affine maps of N (possibly different) affine maps N (possibly different) affine maps (possibly different) affine maps different) affine maps affine maps maps to the N comconstrained to a smaller number of hidden units, Kruglyak ponents of a real-valued output vector {O of a real-valued output vector {O a real-valued output vector {O real-valued output vector {O output vector {O vector {O {O (1990) was able to prove the interesting result that the N bit with each element in this vector each element in this vector element in this vector in this vector vector corresponding to one of encoder problem can, in fact, be solved with two (linear) the possible responses. Thus, given Thus, given given activity level A in the hidden units for any N. Also, Marley & Lacouture (1991) hidden unit, output unit j,7=1,...,.N, unit, output unit j,7=1,...,.N, output unit j,7=1,...,.N, unit j,7=1,...,.N, j,7=1,...,.N, has activity level exists for a (linear) network with a single hidden unit, but are chosen so that, when stimulus / is chosen so that, when stimulus / is so that, when stimulus / is that, when stimulus / is when stimulus / is stimulus / is / is is presented, the activity only ifa (nonlinear) winner-take-all (or maximum finding evel in output unit i is the maximum in output unit i is the maximum output unit i is the maximum unit i is the maximum i is the maximum is the maximum the maximum maximum across the output transform) is applied to the outputs of the network. units. As shown in the papers described As shown in the papers described shown in the papers described in the papers described the papers described papers described described above (Lacouture & 

FIG. 1. 1. Schematic representation of the model. representation of the model. of the model. the model. model. Activation spreads forward from input to hidden unit to output units and from input to hidden unit to output units and input to hidden unit to output units and to hidden unit to output units and hidden unit to output units and unit to output units and output units and units and and is accumulated ina 

}yman data—simulations with more than data—simulations with more than with more than more than than one hidden unit, even in the noisy case, give performance in the noisy case, give performance the noisy case, give performance noisy case, give performance case, give performance give performance performance much superior to human data (Lacouture & Marley, 1991). data (Lacouture & Marley, 1991). (Lacouture & Marley, 1991). & Marley, 1991). Marley, 1991). 1991). 

The activity value in the hidden unit is activity value in the hidden unit is value in the hidden unit is in the hidden unit is the hidden unit is hidden unit is unit is is then mapped by a set of N (possibly different) affine maps of N (possibly different) affine maps N (possibly different) affine maps (possibly different) affine maps different) affine maps affine maps maps to the N components of a real-valued output vector {O of a real-valued output vector {O a real-valued output vector {O real-valued output vector {O output vector {O vector {O {O awh), vey oOnt N)}, with each element in this vector each element in this vector element in this vector in this vector vector corresponding to one of the possible responses. Thus, given Thus, given given activity level A in the hidden unit, output unit j,7=1,...,.N, unit, output unit j,7=1,...,.N, output unit j,7=1,...,.N, unit j,7=1,...,.N, j,7=1,...,.N, has activity level are chosen so that, when stimulus / is chosen so that, when stimulus / is so that, when stimulus / is that, when stimulus / is when stimulus / is stimulus / is / is is presented, the activity evel in output unit i is the maximum in output unit i is the maximum output unit i is the maximum unit i is the maximum i is the maximum is the maximum the maximum maximum across the output units. As shown in the papers described As shown in the papers described shown in the papers described in the papers described the papers described papers described described above (Lacouture & Marley, 1991; Stork & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and 1991; Stork & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and Stork & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and 1993), appropriate slope and appropriate slope and slope and and intercept values can always be selected that “solve” the values can always be selected that “solve” the can always be selected that “solve” the be selected that “solve” the selected that “solve” the that “solve” the “solve” the encoder problem in this form, that is, with one hidden unit problem in this form, that is, with one hidden unit in this form, that is, with one hidden unit this form, that is, with one hidden unit form, that is, with one hidden unit that is, with one hidden unit is, with one hidden unit with one hidden unit one hidden unit hidden unit unit and a nonlinear output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical a nonlinear output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical nonlinear output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical network. Figure 2 shows a graphical Figure 2 shows a graphical 2 shows a graphical shows a graphical a graphical representation of a solution for the case where N=4 and solution for the case where N=4 and for the case where N=4 and the case where N=4 and case where N=4 and where N=4 and N=4 and and 

In related work, Lacouture & Marley (1991) show, Marley, 1991; Stork & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and 1991; Stork & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and Stork & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and & Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and Allen, 1993), appropriate slope and 1993), appropriate slope and appropriate slope and slope and and through simulations, that a simple (noisy) implementation intercept values can always be selected that “solve” the values can always be selected that “solve” the can always be selected that “solve” the be selected that “solve” the selected that “solve” the that “solve” the “solve” the of the encoder problem can reproduce various aspects of encoder problem in this form, that is, with one hidden unit problem in this form, that is, with one hidden unit in this form, that is, with one hidden unit this form, that is, with one hidden unit form, that is, with one hidden unit that is, with one hidden unit is, with one hidden unit with one hidden unit one hidden unit hidden unit unit absolute identification data for unidimensional stimuli. In and a nonlinear output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical a nonlinear output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical nonlinear output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical output network. Figure 2 shows a graphical network. Figure 2 shows a graphical Figure 2 shows a graphical 2 shows a graphical shows a graphical a graphical the case of absolute identification with N stimulus-response representation of a solution for the case where N=4 and solution for the case where N=4 and for the case where N=4 and the case where N=4 and case where N=4 and where N=4 and N=4 and and pairs, the (noisy) network that best models these data consists of NV input units, V output units, and one intermediary hidden unit. A distinct pattern of activity over the N input 1.0 | unstmuli i ts (respectively, (respectively, output responses). units) represents It is assumed each that of the each N &| Re°° | a stimulus in an absolute identification experiment with N 2 og oe eo stimulus-response pairs leads to a different pattern of 6 7x activity across the NV input units and that the activity in S 0.4] Sura Unit 3 these N input units is then combined linearly before being 3 passed through the hidden unit. Thus, for each stimulus < 02 | i=l,..., N the input to the hidden unit can be represented Sopot nin | | by a (nonnegative) real value S,(i), i=1,..., N. We use the ° : subscript N to keep track of the number of stimuli in the ° * a "8 a me experiment, and we also assume that the stimuli are ordered Hidden Unit Activation so that S,(7) increases with i,i=1,...,N. Thus, when ; ; stimulus: i, i= 1,...,; N, is. presented,; S'y(i), i=1,... N, is the. theo,e encoder 2. Graphical problem for representation of N = 4. The slopes the of single the lines hidden represent unit solution connecting to input to the hidden unit; see Fig. 1. The fact that there is weights from the hidden unit to output units. The intercepts correspond to only one hidden unit is a crucial aspect of the model’s fit to the bias of the output units. 

386 

LACOUTURE AND MARLEY 

==> picture [245 x 170] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
g 0.8 SSTa | g 0.81 a2
gos ~~
5 04
zo4——ee gomw
60.20 8 020ca
Ts Aone ————__—
go8NSSSZ g 08aNSLAZ|
8 PPO g oOOP
$Z°4 0.20A—— 63 04 020 Ceao, oaw
Hidden Unit Activation Hidden Unit—>- Activation
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 3. Graphical representation of the single hidden unit Solution A to the encoder problem with set sizes N = 4, 6, 8, 10. 

where the activity in the hidden unit for stimulus / is (2i—1)/2N, i=1,..., N. It remains for us to discuss how the actual psychological stimulus values are mapped to activity values in the hidden unit so that this solution works. 

We derived two sets of values—we call these values solvtion constants—for a(j), b(j),j=1,...,N, that solve the encoder problem with one hidden unit; the values of these solution constants are presented later in the context of our development of the encoder problem as a model of absolute identification. We refer to the solutions as Solution A and Solution B. Graphical representation of each solution for various set sizes are presented in Fig. 3 and 4. 

Our major goal in this research was to find simple solutions (to the encoder problem) that captured the major characteristics of the mapping process from a unidimensional 

continuous internal representation to an N-dimensional response vector, and that are reasonable vis-a-vis absolute arbitrary aspect to our choice of the constraints and that identification data. It will become clear that there is an other “reasonable constraints” can be proposed. 

The two proposed solutions are constrained as follows. All stimuli are mapped into hidden unit activity in the interval [0,1], with the actual mapping being different in the two ~ solutionsstimuli used and in depending a particular in experiment both cases (see on the below). range The of so ution constants (slopes and intercepts} depend on set whichsize. Solution are scaling A involves parameters three and parameter £ which is values: a localization s and 2 parameter.constant values Solution are set, B involves the conditions given one+h: parameter. below £. Once uniquely those. determine the slopes a(j),j=1,...,.N, and the intercepts b( 7), 7=1,..., N for all set sizes. 

We now present the results for noiseless networks, with the noisy case being presented later. Consider an absolute identification experiment with N possible stimulus—response pairs. Let S,y({i),i=1,...,N, be the activity level in the hidden unit when stimulus / 1s presented to the network and let OVC), i 7=1, ..., N, be the activity level in output unit / when stimulus / is presented to the network. Then the one hidden unit solution of the encoder problem (and our model of unidimensional! absolute identification) assumes that there are slope values a)(k),k=1,...,N, and intercept values by (A), A =1,..., N, such that fori,j=1,...N 

==> picture [133 x 23] <==

The response “selected” by the network for a given stimulus 7 corresponds to the value r such that 

==> picture [516 x 191] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
1 — ZF \ — ZF Ox(r | i) = ee Lan(j) Syl} +b.(7)].
204 zo, NT _As indicated before, the encoder problem (unidimen- indicated before, the encoder problem (unidimen- before, the encoder problem (unidimen- encoder problem (unidimen- problem (unidimen- (unidimen-
& g sional absolute identification task) can always be solved in absolute identification task) can always be solved in identification task) can always be solved in task) can always be solved in can always be solved in always be solved in solved in in
S 02° Loar 6 02° Taw this way by an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), way by an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), by an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), appropriate selection of the values a,(/), selection of the values a,(/), of the values a,(/), the values a,(/), values a,(/),
Hidden Unit Activation Hidden Unit Activation by(J); i= L, vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- i= L, vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- L, vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- We now present two sets of values (solu- now present two sets of values (solu- present two sets of values (solu- two sets of values (solu- sets of values (solu- of values (solu- values (solu-
tion constants) that we have explored in the context of constants) that we have explored in the context of that we have explored in the context of we have explored in the context of have explored in the context of explored in the context of in the context of the context of context of of
absolute identification tasks. Another possible solution is identification tasks. Another possible solution is tasks. Another possible solution is Another possible solution is possible solution is is
cope; cos; eA iven by Stork & Allen (1993). by Stork & Allen (1993). Stork & Allen (1993). & Allen (1993). Allen (1993). (1993). |
g 5 an g SSS The following solutions were developed partly by looking following solutions were developed partly by looking solutions were developed partly by looking were developed partly by looking developed partly by looking partly by looking by looking looking
gos—— §°* —SSS N at the corresponding values learnt by the networks pre- the corresponding values learnt by the networks pre- corresponding values learnt by the networks pre- values learnt by the networks pre- learnt by the networks pre- by the networks pre- the networks pre- networks pre- pre-
3Z% 620oS S022040 —_iw Sy basisempiricalsented of inconstraints Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the
Hidden Unit Activation Hidden Unit Activation work is needed to formulate this problem in optimization is needed to formulate this problem in optimization needed to formulate this problem in optimization to formulate this problem in optimization formulate this problem in optimization this problem in optimization problem in optimization in optimization optimization
----- End of picture text -----

_As indicated before, the encoder problem (unidimen- indicated before, the encoder problem (unidimen- before, the encoder problem (unidimen- encoder problem (unidimen- problem (unidimen- (unidimensional absolute identification task) can always be solved in absolute identification task) can always be solved in identification task) can always be solved in task) can always be solved in can always be solved in always be solved in solved in in this way by an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), way by an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), by an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), an appropriate selection of the values a,(/), appropriate selection of the values a,(/), selection of the values a,(/), of the values a,(/), the values a,(/), values a,(/), by(J); i= L, vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- i= L, vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- L, vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- vy VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- VV. We now present two sets of values (solu- We now present two sets of values (solu- now present two sets of values (solu- present two sets of values (solu- two sets of values (solu- sets of values (solu- of values (solu- values (solution constants) that we have explored in the context of constants) that we have explored in the context of that we have explored in the context of we have explored in the context of have explored in the context of explored in the context of in the context of the context of context of of absolute identification tasks. Another possible solution is identification tasks. Another possible solution is tasks. Another possible solution is Another possible solution is possible solution is is iven by Stork & Allen (1993). by Stork & Allen (1993). Stork & Allen (1993). & Allen (1993). Allen (1993). (1993). | The following solutions were developed partly by looking following solutions were developed partly by looking solutions were developed partly by looking were developed partly by looking developed partly by looking partly by looking by looking looking at the corresponding values learnt by the networks pre- the corresponding values learnt by the networks pre- corresponding values learnt by the networks pre- values learnt by the networks pre- learnt by the networks pre- by the networks pre- the networks pre- networks pre- prebasisempiricalsented of inconstraints Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on theempiricalsented of inconstraints Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on thesented of inconstraints Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the of inconstraints Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the inconstraints Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on theconstraints Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the Lacouture results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the results concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the concerning that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the that and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the and appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the appeared Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the Marley absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the absolute (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the (1991) plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the plausible identification. and in partly the context of Further on the identification. and in partly the context of Further on the and in partly the context of Further on the in partly the context of Further on the partly the context of Further on the the context of Further on the context of Further on the Further on the on the the work is needed to formulate this problem in optimization is needed to formulate this problem in optimization needed to formulate this problem in optimization to formulate this problem in optimization formulate this problem in optimization this problem in optimization problem in optimization in optimization optimization terms, and to develop further solutions. The two solutions (A and B) assume that: 

FIG. 4. Graphical representation of the single hidden unit Solution B to the encoder problem with set sizes N = 4, 6, 8, 10, 

BOW EFFECTS IN ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

387 

1. Hidden unit activity is limited to the unit interval un0,2. 1).The activity. of each output unitfic is limitedtim to the interval [0, 8] for some fixed B>0, with 5,(1)=f for all N. 

3. (Symmetry). For i=1,..., N, 

==> picture [109 x 23] <==

and 

bai) =ay(N —(i-—1))+5,(N —(i-1)). 

4. Fori=l,...,N—-1 

ay (i) Xy(i) + byt) = agit 1) xy)+ On(it 1, 

where 

==> picture [121 x 27] <==

Condition. 4 states that for strmulus| S,(i), i=1,..., V—1, the activities in output units 7,i+ 1 are equal at the midpoint x,(i) between the input levels for stimuli i, i+ 1. This assumption is motivated by the similarity (but not the identity) of the present representation to that used in single detection theory and would be interpreted there as the criteria or cutpoints lying midway between the means of adjacent stimuli. 

In addition to the above four conditions, Solution A assumes that for 7=1,..., N. 

5. Sy(i)=(2i—1)/2N 

and 

6. ay(1)S,(1)+6,(1) equals a constant 24>0 (for all N). 

Condition 5 makes the stimuli equally spaced in terms of hidden unit activity, with the first (f=!) and last (i= N) stimulus each being a distance away from the ends of the range of hidden unit activity equal to one-half the stimulus spacingha at the hidden unit. level. Condition; 6; makes the activity in output unit 1 when stimulus | 1s presented independent of the set size N. In fact, the assumptions imply that the activity in output unit 7 when stimulus /, j=1,..., N, is presented is independent of the set size NV. In particular,plicity take consider M even. M, Then N Solution integers with A has, M for< N andi=1, ..., for M4/2, sim- 

==> picture [83 x 19] <==

and 

==> picture [157 x 39] <==

It is routine to show that Conditions I to 6 lead to a unique solution for each set size N. Figure 3 illustrates the solution for several set sizes, and we now state it abstractly. First, assume a,(2)>a,(1) and let s=a,(2)/a.(1). Then Solution A for NV odd is 

==> picture [164 x 82] <==

and 

==> picture [245 x 153] <==

Solution A for N even is 

==> picture [131 x 59] <==

and 

==> picture [230 x 123] <==

480/39/4-6 

388 

LACOUTURE AND MARLEY 

In addition to the initial four conditions, Solution B assumes that for i=1,..., N, 

==> picture [117 x 45] <==

> ' _ bs)[When][ N23,][ ay(1)][ Sw(2)][ +][ On(1)][ =][ aw(3)][ Sx(2)][ +]

Condition 5’ makes the stimuli equally spaced in terms of hidden unit activity, with the first (}=1) and last (i= .N) stimulus each being represented at one end of the range. Condition 5’, with Condition 2, ensures that the full output range is used for all set sizes. Condition 7’ is a symmetry condition forcing adjacent “error” outputs (for stimulus 2) to be equal. The solution actually has this property for all stimull. 

Solution B is then, for i=1,..., N, 

==> picture [115 x 27] <==

==> picture [111 x 29] <==

Comparing both sets of conditions, the difference in stimulus representation is unimportant (and can be removed by appropriate changes in the assumptions and results). The difference between Conditions 6, 7 and Conditions 6’, 7’ is important, as discussed below. Also, note that Solution B has one parameter, f, in contrast to the three parameters, s, 8, and 2 in Solution A. The values of these parameters, once chosen, are fixed across set size N. 

As can be seen in Figs. 3 and 4, the given solutions to the encoder problem require finer and finer resolution at the hidden unit activity level—especially in the middle of the range—for larger set sizes. If either the sensory input representation or the network connections are noisy, then it is plausible to believe that performance will be limited as set size and/or stimulus range are increased and that performance will differ at the ends of the range. This is generally the case (see below), but a detailed comparison of the two solutions with the data shows, in fact, that Solution A yields better fits, especially to bow effects in probability correct when these are presented in terms of d’ sensitivity measure. 

3. SIMULATIONS OF THE “NOISY” ENCODER MODEL OF ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

For various reasons discussed below, Solution A gives better fits to human absolute identification data than does 

Solution B, so we concentrate on the former solution. Nonetheless, in passing, we will mention the major aspects of Solution B for contrast and comparison. 

Let Sy(i) be the psychological intensity of stimulus i,i=1,..., N, in an absolute identification experiment with trial, multiple samples of the stimulus value are collected by N stimulus-response pairs. We assume that, for a given a subject; these are then (naturally) interpreted as multiple samples in the network. We also assume, in line with traditional models, that the psychological representations vary across samples, that is, they are “noisy”. Specifically, we suppose that the “noisy” sample value of stimulus 7 when presented on the current trial has value Sy(‘) + N“, where N* is normal with mean zero and standard deviation y. To deal with sequential effects, it may be necessary to also include possible dependence of the psychological (and other) representations on trial number; since we devote minimal attention to sequential effects in this paper, we keep the notation simpler by ignoring trial number. Next, this noisyunit activity. psychological The mapping representation has one is of mapped two forms into depending hidden on whether we are considering Solution A or B. Let #4,(7) be the noisy activity in the hidden unit resulting from the noisy psychological inputthat S<(i)+N*. Then Solution B assumes 

==> picture [205 x 31] <==

where H* is a normal random variable with mean zero and standard deviation 4. 

Note that, if we ignore the noise components, in Solution B the mapping from psychological representation to hidden unit representation maps all presented stimulus ranges onto the unit interval, with the smallest stimulus S,(1) being mapped to 0 and the largest stimulus $,(V) being mapped to 1. Also, when the stimuli are equally spaced on the psychological scale, they are equally spaced at the level of hidden unit activity. This type of mapping has been proposed by numerous authors in their explanations of the bow (end-anchor) effect and other phenomena associated with psychological range (see, for instance Durlach & Braida, 1969; Gravetter & Lockhead, 1973; Berliner & Durlach, 1973; Braida et a/. 1984). It is important to note that this mapping alone cannot explain bow effects unless the variances are assumed to depend in an appropriate way on the position of a stimulus relative to the ends of the range. Such an assumption seems quite arbitrary and is not made in our model. The motivation for adding the noise term H* is that the mapping has to be “computed” and thus is likely to be inaccurate (noisy). We assume additive noise asa first approach; multiplicative noise might be equally or more plausible. 

BOW EFFECTS IN ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

389 

With Solution A the mapping from psychological values to hidden untt activity is given by 

N—1rstt; 

. 

we 

==> picture [47 x 10] <==

where all terms are as in Solution B. Clearly, the only difference for the mapping component is that in Solution A the end stimuli are not mapped to 0 and I, but—in the case of stimuli that are equally spaced psychologically—they are mapped to points at a distance from the ends of the range equal to half the stimulus spacing (at the level of the hidden unit). Nonetheless, the stimuli continue to be equally spaced at the hidden unit level if they are equally spaced at the psychological level. 

The output activation for output unit j,j=1,..., N, given stimulus i, is now given by 

OFS | ) =[al ys) A)+ b(/)] + D*(,), 

where D*(/) is a normal random variable with mean zero and standard deviation ¢, and a(/), b(7) are given by the solution constants either of Solution A or of Solution B. 

Finally, within a trial, the activation of each output unit is accumulated in an integrator associated with that output unit (response). Thus, for stimulus i and intratrial sample X, activation in the integrator associated with output (response) / is 

==> picture [217 x 26] <==

where O*(|i) is the current activation of output unit jand A*(j|i) is the integrated activation after k intratrial samples. We assume that at the beginning of each trial the contents of each integrator are set to zero. Also note that wedo not include any noise in the integrator process since, at this stage of model development, such noise cannot be distinguished from the noise term D*(i) in the output activation. Each integrator has a threshold for “firing” and the response is made that is associated with the first integrator to reach its threshold. In this paper, the thresholds are equal for all the integrators and are independent of set size and signal value; the threshold value used in the remainder of the paper is 50. 

In summary, the proposed model has three major components: the first is the (noisy) mapping of the psychological representation of the stimuli to a scaled (noisy) internal representation, the second is the (noisy) mapping of the internal representation to a (noisy) multidimensional output vector, and the third is the integration to threshold of the components of the output vector. The specific forms of the mappings are those of our solutions to the encoder problem. Various authors have presented similar models 

in similar domains. For instance, Lacouture (1989) and Hinton & Shallice (1991) developed similar ideas to model responses and response times in word recognition. 

4. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR THE “NOISY” NEURAL MODEL 

The model was simulated using custom-made software,’ With no learning process (connectionist or otherwise) included; see Marley & Lacouture (1991) for connectionist learning in similar networks. We present the results of three sets of simulations: the first series aims to replicate the basic phenomena of absolute identification including the bow effects, the second series incorporates range effects, and the third series gives preliminary results on sequential effects. 

Simulations were carried out for each set {A and B) of solution constants. Solution A gave better results and is used in the remainder of this paper; the reasons for the better fit of this solution are given below. This solution has three parameters s, 4, and f, and preliminary simulations suggested that we set s=2,A=1.1, and f = 1.0. Once these values have been selected, the performance of the network depends on the amount of noise in the simulated process. In the simulation results presented here, the “noise” variances are invariant across intratrial samples and set sizes, but are changed when we discuss sequential effects. The variances of the Gaussian noise at input, hidden, and output levels are taken as the free parameters of the simulation and are systematically manipulated to fit the data.Thee firfirt 

> systematically manipulated to fit the data.Thee firfirt s t s etet manipulated to fit the data. o f fsimulatonssimulat to fit the data. i fit the data. assumes the data. data. a large large stimuusstimu l range. Therefore noise in the sensory input (the term N* for Sample x) is ignored as it is scaled by the (large) input range Sw(N)— Sy(1). Thus in this set of simulations noise 1s important only at the Jevel of the hidden unit and at the level Of the output units. The value of the standard deviation of the random variable generating noise at the level of the hidden unit 7 is 0.08 and the standard deviation of the ‘andom variable generating noise for each output unit ¢ is 9.18.

Table 1 and Figs. 5 and 6 present both simulation results and empirical data for absolute identification with set sizes N=2,4,6,8,10. The data, from Lacouture (1994), are pooled results from three subjects with each data point based on 150 observations. The task was absolute tdentification of line length with the lines being presented on a VGA COmputer screen. The line lengths—measured in screen dots With 72 dots per inch—-were 92, 106, 120, 138, 160, 184, 212, 242, 278, and 320. This corresponds to 15% separation between adjacent stimuli, which is approximately three times the Weber’s constant for line length. Each subject 

Written in C and developed on a Sun-UNIX platform, the software is available from the first author. 

390 

LACOUTURE AND MARLEY 

TABLE 1 

Stimulus—Response Matrices for Simulations and Behavioral Data for Set Size 10 

+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| Stimulus |      |      |      |      |                 | Response |      |      |      |      |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
|          | ]    | 2    | 3    | 4    | 5               | 6        | 7    | 8    | 9    | 10   |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
|          |      |      |      |      | Simulation      |          |      |      |      |      |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| l        | 0.95 | 0.05 | -    | -    | -               | -        | -    | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 2        | 0.04 | 0.80 | 0.16 | -    | -               | -        | ~    | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 3        | -    | 0.10 | 0.59 | 0.27 | 0.04            | -        | -    | _    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 4        | -    | -    | 0.21 | 0.46 | 0,33            | -        | -    | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 5        | -    | -    | -    | 0.34 | 0.44            | 0.19     | 0.03 | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 6        | -    | -    | -    | 0.04 | 0.20            | 0,46     | 0,28 | 0.02 | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 7        | -    | -    | -    | -    | -               | 0.30     | 0.48 | 0.22 | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 8        | -    | -    | -    | -    | -               | 0.04     | 0.26 | 0.60 | 0.10 | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 9        | -    | -    | -    | -    | -               | -        | 0.01 | 0.17 | 0.80 | 0.02 |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 10       | -    | -    | -    | -    | -               | -        | -    | -    | 0.07 | 0.93 |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
|          |      |      |      |      | Behavioral Data |          |      |      |      |      |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| |        | 0.81 | 0.16 | 0.01 | 0.03 | -               | -        | -    | -    | ~    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 2        | 0.01 | 0.7] | 0.17 | 6.09 | 0.02            | -        | -    | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 3        | -    | 0.12 | 0.68 | 0.17 | 0.04            | -        | -    | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 4        | —    | -    | 0.12 | 0.60 | 0.25            | 0.01     | 0.02 | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 5        | -    | -    | 0.01 | 0.14 | 0,52            | 0,22     | 0.12 | -    | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 6        | -    | -    | 0.0  | 0,03 | 0.14            | 0.61     | 0.17 | 0.04 | ~    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 7        | _~   | -    | ~    | -    | 0.03            | 0.16     | 0.67 | 0.13 | -    | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| &        | -    | -    | -    | -    | -               | 0.01     | 0.19 | 0.68 | 0.12 | -    |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 9        | -    | -    | -    | -    | -               | -        | 0.01 | 0.14 | 0.82 | 0.03 |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+
| 10       | -    | -    | _    | -    | -               | -        | -    | 0,02 | 0.08 | 0.90 |
+----------+------+------+------+------+-----------------+----------+------+------+------+------+

Note. Entries in the table represent relative counts (proportions) for that cell. 

completed two sessions for each of the set sizes N= 10, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 again, for a total of 12 sessions over a 10-day period. Smaller stimulus sets are subsets of the larger ones but all have the same median point—for instance, for N =2, the two stimuli correspond to stimuli 5 and 6 of the stimulus set with VW = 10. Thus for larger set sizes the total range is larger but the difference between adjacent stimuli does not vary. In each session each stimulus was randomly presented 60 times. Average probability correct and mean 60 times. Average probability correct and mean times. Average probability correct and mean Average probability correct and mean probability correct and mean correct and mean and mean mean _ gives a better fit to the data than does Solution B. Looking response time were computed for each stimulus using the last 50 presentations during the second session for a given set size. Only correct responses were used in the computation of mean response time. Simulation results are based on 500 simulated trials and, again, only correct responses are used in the computation of mean response time. 

in terms of a d’ measure suggested by Luce ef al. (1982).? We see from this comparison that for set size 10 the fit between data and simulation response probabilities is not good. However, remember that we are attempting to fit the results for a// set sizes for both response selected and response time with a single set of parameter values that do not vary across set size, range, etc. 

This is the appropriate place to discuss why Solution A 

presented 60 times. Average probability correct and mean 60 times. Average probability correct and mean times. Average probability correct and mean Average probability correct and mean probability correct and mean correct and mean and mean mean _ gives a better fit to the data than does Solution B. Looking 

2Luce ef al. (1982} propose collapsing the matrix of response probabilities in absolute identification tasks—such as those in Table 1 -—-into a two by two table (see below) for each pair of stimuli Sw(i—1), Sw(4),#=2, .... N, and then computing a d’ value for each such pair of stimuli. Their procedure involves, given stimulus Sxl), considering all responses r,,{[7}][ such][ that] / > / to be “hit” while, given stimulus $,{#), all responses ry(j) such that / < / are considered to be a “false alarm.” The d’s are then computed in the usual way. It appears to us that this approach, which provides an indication of the psychological distances between any two adjacent stimuli, is based on a heuristic idea that may not be theoretically defensible in multiple choice (absolute identification} experiments. LucMorMor e over, er al. our is very experience sensitive sh t o w s mall that the variations d’ calculation in the stimulus-response as proposed by matrix. Because of this sensitivity, the given d’ values should be viewed 

Tableabe | sh the stimul tri babilit is OWS © sumu us/response ma TX (pro aDility of response ?,i=1,..., N, to stimulus j, j= 1, ..., NY) for set size 10 for both the data and the simulation. Both matrices have a “diagonal” structure with larger values close to the main diagonal. However, the data have smaller probability correc tort for th€ end valuesval (s timuli 1 and 10) ) tant h an ddoes ththe LucMorMor e simulation. This result can also be seen in the relevant parts of Figs. 5 and 6, where the latter figure presents the results — with caution. 

BOW EFFECTS IN ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

391 

==> picture [239 x 124] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
a = 1 1 = 2
_o84 \y : _o8
S06 " Ld Eos a s 7
E > oho-0 2 a
: 0.4 3 0.4
v Q
i 234567 8 9 10 i 23 45678 9 10
Sumulus Stimulus
Simulation Data
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 5. Average probability correct plotted against ordinal position for the simulated model (left panel) and behavioral data (right panel) for set sizes N= 2, 4, 6, 8, 10. In following figures, we have MM (N=2),@(N=4), A (N=6), @ (N=8), and O (N= 10). 

at ; Table 1, we see that most of the time when the person provides the Wrong Tesponse, a response adjacent to the correct one is provided. This means that when stimulus/ is Presented, the person normally responds with one of the responses i — I, ft +1.In other words, the first integrator to reach threshold is that associated with one of these outputs. Now. it is reasonable. . (although we have. not. proved this) to believe that in this network model, with given amounts of hidden and output noise, the probabilitymn of making; response i—1 to stimulus i (assuming i> 1) will be related to the size of the differe ce Oy(i|i) - 1A) ih ‘tint the ee MELE vi 7) tat 38, (© size of the difference in the mean output values of the output Units associated with Fesponses | and i—l when stimulus 7 is presented. Also, it is reasonable to believe that this quantity; will be closely; related; ; to the d’ difference. et al, (1982) and as described i footnote 2. Now it IS easy to check that in Solution A, for arbitrary positive integers ma with a,OwGt)aeG Ny henever WIS M[’] f ‘ous set sj 4 ° Pq — varSoulan 0. 7 ye 0 Gti va i. on ih7 _ se Ned Th, ~nN’ Par > Unt vli— 1], 7=2,....N, do no 

==> picture [243 x 140] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
5 5
45 45
4 4
8 aati _ oe
Eos 225
5 2 > 2
1.5 "
as 05
0 0
1 2 3 45oe 7 8 9 123 Stimake 7 8 9
at
Simulation a“
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 6. d’ plotted against ordinal position for the simulated model (left. panel) and behavioral data (right panel) for set sizes N = 4, 6, 8, 10. 

depend on N, but more importantly they do depend on j; in fact, for N even, 

ae 

: 

. 

==> picture [189 x 77] <==

with a similar formula for N odd. Thus these differences show a bow effect, and so to the extent that they are predictors of d’ values, those d’ values will also show the bow effect (as desired). Of course, Solution A could be seen as a “fix” to yield the desired effect. All we can say is that it was not so constructed, but just arose naturally from values suggested by Lacouture & Marley’s (1991) simulation results. The parallel values in Solution B equal £/(N—1)? for all i, Thus they do not depend on i, but they do depend on N, becoming smaller as NV increases. Thus one would not expect simulations with the solution constants of Solution B to give the bow effect (in response probabilities or a’) and theyhey ddo not. An interesting; . theoretical‘cal question‘on isis thatthat o of . ; : whetherae Solutionet A can be motivatedwe in terms of some; optimization criterion, such as maximizing the cross correlation or maximizing the information transmitted between the desired outputs and those given by the network. Figure 7 presents mean response times for correct responses given by the simulated process (in network time steps and corresponding estimated milliseconds) and the parallel| behavioral‘oral data (in. milliseconds)“tl; for set sizes: response times for the end stimuli are (essentially) equal, independent of set size, in both the data and the simulation. This is not the case for the data for set sizes N = 2, 4, which showsizes) in significant the response decreases times (relative to the end to stimuli. those for larger However, the set simulation results in Fig. 5 for sets of size N=2,4 give probability correct essentially equal to one for all stimuli, whereas the data do not show this result. Now remember that the simulations are based on the same parameter values for all set sizes—in particular, the threshold value for the response integrators is fixed (at 50 in these simulations). Clearly, making this threshold smaller will reduce simulated response time and if made small enough will also reduce probability correct. Thus the match between the simulation results and the data for set sizes N= 2, 4 can probably be improved by changes in the integrator threshold. We do not change the threshold here because, as previously indicated, weof the are simulation attempting as fixed far across as possible set size, to keep range, the parameters etc.; later WOrk will develop more detailed fits of the model to data. Nonetheless, we carried out a regression analysis of mean 

392 

LACOUTURE AND MARLEY 

==> picture [241 x 122] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
aw3ER7  i2001400 $ 120041400 peo, = ON.
2 60 | aN £1000 = 1000 1 i patuan
F 50 80 800 on, .
3% 60) 8 600 lial
eo 400 = 400
S10 200 8 200
0 0 0
123 4 5 67 8 9 10 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1
Stimulus Stimulus
simulation ata
----- End of picture text -----

a functionFigure 8 of plots set the size amount for each of of information the simulations transmitted and the as data. For set size N= 10, each gives appropriately 2.1 bits for information transmitted. 

Numerous identification and categorization experiments yleld response time data where correct responses are, on average, faster than incorrect responses (e.g., Hick, 1952; Hale, 1969; Stanovich, Pachella, & Smith, 1977). Figure 9 . . presents simulation and data results for average response times for correct and incorrect responses for various set sizes from 2 to 10. The simulation gives faster average response time for correct responses for set sizes 4 and above, although—-perhaps surprisingly—the data do not show this effect. Interestingly, additional simulations show that when there is no noise at the Aidden unit level, the simulation yields equal average correct and incorrect response times. Here again the result suggests that a better characterization of the predicted response time distributions is needed to understand the underlying process. 

FIG. 7. Mean response time plotted against ordinal position for the simulated model (in simulation cycles and estimated ms on left panel) and behavioral data (in ms on right panel) for set sizes N= 2, 4, 6, 8, 10. 

response time (in simulation steps) for the simulated process against mean response time for the behavioral data. A strong linear relation is obtained (r = 0.81), with a regression coefficient of 17.07 and an intercept of —120.12, which suggests that each network time step corresponds to approximately 17 ms of “real” processing time. One might be tempted to interpret the residual processing time given by this regression line when the number of simulation steps is zero to be some base processing time, corresponding to, say, a fixed motor time for each response. However, in the present case this base time is negative (—120 ms); thus, either the model needs revision or such an interpretation is not viable. 

Given the above, perhaps surprising, result when there is 0 noise at the hidden unit level, we also explored the consequences of no noise at the level of output units. Figure 10 reports d’ (calculated in the way described in footnote 2) Plotted against ordinal position for set size N=10 with various levels of noise at the level of the hidden unit. As can be seen, in this case—noise in the hidden unit but not in the OUtput units—there is no bow effect. We can only speculate on the significance of this result, but it clearly indicates that —under our modeling conceptualization—the stochastic our modeling conceptualization—the stochastic modeling conceptualization—the stochastic conceptualization—the stochastic stochastic aspect of the process is central in producing the bow effect. of the process is central in producing the bow effect. the process is central in producing the bow effect. process is central in producing the bow effect. is central in producing the bow effect. central in producing the bow effect. in producing the bow effect. producing the bow effect. the bow effect. bow effect. effect. This implies that not only is the mapping involved in implies that not only is the mapping involved in that not only is the mapping involved in not only is the mapping involved in only is the mapping involved in is the mapping involved in the mapping involved in mapping involved in involved in in Tesponse selection important, but, furthermore, the noise selection important, but, furthermore, the noise important, but, furthermore, the noise but, furthermore, the noise furthermore, the noise the noise COmponent appears necessary. One might argue that a appears necessary. One might argue that a necessary. One might argue that a One might argue that a might argue that a argue that a that a a limitation here is that the value of output noise is set inde- here is that the value of output noise is set inde- is that the value of output noise is set inde- that the value of output noise is set inde- the value of output noise is set inde- value of output noise is set inde- of output noise is set inde- output noise is set inde- noise is set inde- is set inde- set inde- independently of the value of hidden and input noise. On the of the value of hidden and input noise. On the the value of hidden and input noise. On the value of hidden and input noise. On the hidden and input noise. On the and input noise. On the input noise. On the noise. On the On the the contrary, we find this an interesting aspect of the model, as we find this an interesting aspect of the model, as find this an interesting aspect of the model, as this an interesting aspect of the model, as an interesting aspect of the model, as interesting aspect of the model, as aspect of the model, as of the model, as the model, as model, as as it indicates that several independent processing stages can indicates that several independent processing stages can that several independent processing stages can several independent processing stages can independent processing stages can processing stages can stages can can be represented within the same simulation framework. represented within the same simulation framework. the same simulation framework. same simulation framework. simulation framework. framework. 

While Fig. 7 shows that mean response time for the —under our modeling conceptualization—the stochastic our modeling conceptualization—the stochastic modeling conceptualization—the stochastic conceptualization—the stochastic stochastic simulated process corresponds reasonably well to the aspect of the process is central in producing the bow effect. of the process is central in producing the bow effect. the process is central in producing the bow effect. process is central in producing the bow effect. is central in producing the bow effect. central in producing the bow effect. in producing the bow effect. producing the bow effect. the bow effect. bow effect. effect. behavioral data, we did not obtain a good fit between the This implies that not only is the mapping involved in implies that not only is the mapping involved in that not only is the mapping involved in not only is the mapping involved in only is the mapping involved in is the mapping involved in the mapping involved in mapping involved in involved in in simulated and behavioral response time variances. Tesponse selection important, but, furthermore, the noise selection important, but, furthermore, the noise important, but, furthermore, the noise but, furthermore, the noise furthermore, the noise the noise Although the response time variances in the data are rather COmponent appears necessary. One might argue that a appears necessary. One might argue that a necessary. One might argue that a One might argue that a might argue that a argue that a that a a chaotic, there is a trend for them to be smaller at the ends _ limitation here is that the value of output noise is set inde- here is that the value of output noise is set inde- is that the value of output noise is set inde- that the value of output noise is set inde- the value of output noise is set inde- value of output noise is set inde- of output noise is set inde- output noise is set inde- noise is set inde- is set inde- set inde- indeof the range. The variances of the simulated process do not pendently of the value of hidden and input noise. On the of the value of hidden and input noise. On the the value of hidden and input noise. On the value of hidden and input noise. On the hidden and input noise. On the and input noise. On the input noise. On the noise. On the On the the show such an effect clearly (although it does appear to some contrary, we find this an interesting aspect of the model, as we find this an interesting aspect of the model, as find this an interesting aspect of the model, as this an interesting aspect of the model, as an interesting aspect of the model, as interesting aspect of the model, as aspect of the model, as of the model, as the model, as model, as as extent), but more significantly the simulated variances are it indicates that several independent processing stages can indicates that several independent processing stages can that several independent processing stages can several independent processing stages can independent processing stages can processing stages can stages can can an order of magnitude smaller that those in the data. be represented within the same simulation framework. represented within the same simulation framework. the same simulation framework. same simulation framework. simulation framework. framework. Further work is clearly needed. For instance, response times are often well fit by log normal distributions, as were the simulation distributions in Lacouture’s (1990) work. _* 1600 _ 1900 _ 1900 1900 

==> picture [250 x 130] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
_* 1600 _ 1900 _ 1900 1900
3% 1200 3 1200
3 - 800 " 800
= 400 ™ 400
£ —#- Correct EB —@ Conrect
30 0 0
2345678 SW 23456789
Set Size Set Size 01
Simulation Data
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [232 x 106] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
ge 2 = 4
2 S
Z 1 - 1
3 0.5 z 05
3 §
—E 0 = 0
< 0234567891011 0234567891011
a Set Size Set Size
Simulation Data
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 9. Mean response time plotted against set size for correct and incorrect responses from the simulated model (in simulation cycles on left panel) and the behavioral data (in ms on right panel). 

FIG. 8. Information transmitted (bits) plotted against set size for the simulated model (left panel) and the behavioral data (right panel). 

BOW EFFECTS 1N ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

393 

==> picture [254 x 153] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
7 “= 4 =0.0
P
5 —*— 1 =0.8 |
~4|* @-e—-e-*-¢2 © 6-9
3 3
>
pp
0
0123 4 567 8 9 10
Stimulus
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. 10. d@’ plotted against ordinal position for the simulated model with no input noise and no hidden unit noise and three different values of output noise (7 = 0, 0.4, 0.8). 

As mentioned earlier, sequential dependencies in stimulus presentation schedules influence the magnitude of the bow effect in response probabilities. For instance, Luce et al, (1982) present data that show that if a stimulus in the neighborhood of the previous stimulus is predictably presented, then performance (in terms of probability correct) increases. Luce et al. (1982) used an experimental design in which they were able to manipulate the “distance” between stimuli on consecutive trials, yet keep the overall presentation probabilities the same across conditions. They used three conditions which they called small step, large step, and random step. Under the small step condition, stimuli on consecutive trials are predictably “close” to each other in psychological value; in the large step condition they are predictably “distant” from each other; and the random step condition uses a standard presentation schedule where there are no dependencies between adjacent stimulus 

==> picture [240 x 130] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
' j
K-00 0-0, © #7 Keen, ey]
= [08] =
5 os Fos98
2 ao z as
F Z
0.2 0.2
; ;
1234 567 8 9 10 12345678 9101
Simulation Data
----- End of picture text -----

FIG. for the simulated11. Average model probability correct plotted against ordinal position (left panel) and the behavioral data (right panel) for set size 10 using different stimulus selection methods (random, small steps, large steps). The right panel is adapted from Luce, Nosofsky, Green, & Smith (1982). 

presentations. Luce ef al.’s (1982) main finding is that the bow effect As significantly reduced for the small step condition relative to the large step and the random step conditions; see Fig. 11. 

> thatAs selective an explanation “attention” of these can data, produce Luce et a reduction a/. (1982) suggest in the variance of the representation of the stimuli in an “attended” subregion of the psychological space. In an attempt to incorporate sucha selective attention mechanism (e.g., a local change in variance) in our model, the simulated process was modified so that production of response I was followed, on the next trial, by a decrease in the variance of the Gaussian noise associated with output units i— 1,1, and itl. Arbitrarily, and as a simple approximation to an “attention band” mechanism, the variance of the Gaussian noise associated with the output unit that provided the response and of its two (one for the end responses) nearest neighbors was set to zero, while the variance was unchanged /©F the other output units. Using a random walk process we TSP!oduced the three conditions used by Luce ef al. (1982): S™all step (3), large step, and random. The probabilities of correct choice for random, small step, and large step conditons (for N= 10) were computed—based on 1000 trials and “S!"8 the same parameter values as in Previous simulations —and are Biven in Fig. 11. As can be seen, and in agreement with Luce et als (1982) hypothesis, the bow effect is present only in the random and large step conditions. Interestingly, the modification did not substantially alter the results for the random selection condition. ; .

All of the above simulation results assume that the stimuli "° widely separated at the “psychological ° level and thus ‘hat it 1s appropriate to ignore the effects of “sensory” noise. Most psychophysical models of identification assume that stimulus separation and total stimulus range have a major impact on performances. Although the present model attributes performance limitations to the “mapping” characteristics of response selection and assumes that the stimuli are perfectly discriminable, the case of confusable stimuli can easily be implemented. Stimulus separation in the psychological space depends on total stimulus range and ontions the assumed variance small of the “sensorial” representati nise o n. The relative previous to a simula- “large” stimulus range. To simulate the case where stimulus separation is smaller, and thus the stimuli are not perfectly discriminable, the parameter value selected for the input (or sensorial) noise was set to the maximum possible value that matched the observed amount of information transmitted, yet did not alter the predicted performances in the prior simulations of “large range” conditions. This gave a value (in arbitrary units) of y= 10 for the standard deviation of N*,. the normal random. variable associated with. input. NOIse. We then manipulated the total range which, with ©Quidistant stimuli, is equivalent to changing the common stimulus separation. Figure 12 shows a plot of information 

394 

LACOUTURE AND MARLEY 

==> picture [164 x 158] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
3
G
E25
2 5
‘2
5 1.5
e
|
E
-2 0.5
0
0 Fo 20 30 4050
Range (dB)
----- End of picture text -----

between the hidden unit and the output vector, and on the specific parameter values in Solution A. It remains for further research to decide whether the (noisy) mapping process alone can fully explain the bow effects or whether it is necessary to include other mechanisms using anchor points. The main contribution of our work is to demonstrate that response or mapping mechanisms, rather than perceptual mechanisms, might explain the bow effects in absolute identification tasks. Obviously, much further experimental, simulation, and theoretical work is needed to fully understand the relevant domains. 

APPENDIX: NOMENCLATURE 

FIG. 12. Information transmitted plotted against range (in arbitrary units) for the simulated model. 

N set size

k intratrial sample number

transmitted dB’s. for N=10 with different ranges measured in The results show the standard pattern of information transmitted as a function of range. 

Sy(i)

   magnitude of stimulus i, given set size NV

Ok(j|i) output value (response) j, given stimulus j, set size N, and intratrial sample k

h hidden unit activation

a(j) slope (gain) of connecting weight from hidden unit to output unit /

5. DISCUSSION 

b(j) intercept (bias) of connecting weight from hidden unit to output unit j to output unit j output unit j unit j j

We have proposed that the intriguing bow effects in unit to output unit j to output unit j output unit j unit j j unidimensional absolute identification can be explained by - s, A localization parameters in Solution A the mapping process that is involved when an internal £ scaling parameter in Solutions A and B unidimensional psychological representation is mapped toa N* normal random variable with mean zero and std. random variable with mean zero and std. variable with mean zero and std. with mean zero and std. mean zero and std. zero and std. and std. std. multidimensional response vector. This idea follows up on dev. y (input noise) y (input noise) (input noise) noise) earlier work by Lacouture & Marley (1991) that modeled H* normal random variable with mean zero and std. random variable with mean zero and std. variable with mean zero and std. with mean zero and std. mean zero and std. zero and std. and std. std. absolute identification using a connectionist feed-forward dev. 7 {hidden unit noise) 7 {hidden unit noise) {hidden unit noise) unit noise) network (with one hidden unit) plus a learning algorithm. D* normal random variable with mean zero and std. random variable with mean zero and std. variable with mean zero and std. with mean zero and std. mean zero and std. zero and std. and std. std. This earlier work led us to the mathematical solution of the dev. ¢ ¢ (output units noise) units noise) noise) relevant mapping problem, as presented earlier in this A%(j|i) accumulated activation for output (response) /, paper. The inclusion in the current model of Gaussian noise given stimulus i, set size N, after & intratrial and a set of parallel accumulators allows us to model choice samples probabilities and response times. Simulation results show that the model can yield the known bow effects in choice REFERENCES probabilities and response times and that these two effects are partially due to different aspects of the model—the bow Ackley, D. H., Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning D. H., Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning H., Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning T. J. (1985). A learning J. (1985). A learning (1985). A learning A learning learning effect in response probabilities being given by noise at the algorithm for Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. for Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. Science, 9, 147-169. 9, 147-169. 147-169. level of the output units, and the difference in error and Baird, J. C. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. J. C. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. C. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. psychophysical scaling, In R. D. scaling, In R. D. In R. D. R. D. D. the hidden unit. Finally, adding an “attention band” of Tarow Indow on His 70th Birthday, pp. 235-251). Mahwah, NJ: mechanism to the model allows us to reproduce the general Erlbaum. form of certain effects of nonrandom stimulus presentation Berliner, J. E, & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution J. E, & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution E, & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution Intensity perception. IV. Resolution perception. IV. Resolution IV. Resolution Resolution sequences. in roving-level discrimimation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of discrimimation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of Journal of the Acoustical Society of of the Acoustical Society of the Acoustical Society of Acoustical Society of Society of of The results presented here do not invalidate the anchor, 4"¢#¢# 53. 12701287. 53. 12701287. 12701287. . . ; . Berliner, J. E., Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. J. E., Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. E., Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. D. (1977). Intensity perception. (1977). Intensity perception. Intensity perception. perception. hypothesis proposed and developed by other authors, nor VII. Further data on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and Further data on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and data on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and roving-level discrimination and the resolution and discrimination and the resolution and and the resolution and the resolution and resolution and and do we claim to have the definitive model of absolute idenbias edge effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, edge effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, the Acoustical Society of America, 61, Acoustical Society of America, 61, Society of America, 61, of America, 61, America, 61, 61, tification. We have simply shown that a mechanism in the 1577-1585. response choice process linked to the mapping from one to Braida, L. D., & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution L. D., & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution D., & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution Intensity perception. II. Resolution perception. II. Resolution II. Resolution Resolution many . . . . . in one-interval paradigms. Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, one-interval paradigms. Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, paradigms. Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, Acoustical Society ofAmerica, ofAmerica,America, dimensions might be an alternative explanation. We 51, 483-502. 483-502. are aware that, as produced here, the bow effect depends — Braida, L. D., Lim, J. S., Berliner, J. E., Durlach, N. L., Rabinowitz, W. M., heavily on the symmetric aspect of the weighted connections & Purks, S. R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor Purks, S. R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor S. R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor perception. XII. Perceptual anchor XII. Perceptual anchor Perceptual anchor anchor 

N* normal random variable with mean zero and std. random variable with mean zero and std. variable with mean zero and std. with mean zero and std. mean zero and std. zero and std. and std. std. dev. y (input noise) y (input noise) (input noise) noise)

H* normal random variable with mean zero and std. random variable with mean zero and std. variable with mean zero and std. with mean zero and std. mean zero and std. zero and std. and std. std. dev. 7 {hidden unit noise) 7 {hidden unit noise) {hidden unit noise) unit noise)

D* normal random variable with mean zero and std. random variable with mean zero and std. variable with mean zero and std. with mean zero and std. mean zero and std. zero and std. and std. std. dev. ¢ ¢ (output units noise) units noise) noise)

Ackley, D. H., Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning D. H., Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning H., Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning G. E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning E., & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning & Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning Sejnowsky, T. J. (1985). A learning T. J. (1985). A learning J. (1985). A learning (1985). A learning A learning learning algorithm for Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. for Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169. Science, 9, 147-169. 9, 147-169. 147-169.

Baird, J. C. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. J. C. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. C. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. (1995). Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. Judgment windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. windows in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. in psychophysical scaling, In R. D. psychophysical scaling, In R. D. scaling, In R. D. In R. D. R. D. D.

Berliner, J. E, & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution J. E, & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution E, & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution & Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution Durlach, N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution N. I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution I. (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution (1973). Intensity perception. IV. Resolution Intensity perception. IV. Resolution perception. IV. Resolution IV. Resolution Resolution in roving-level discrimimation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of discrimimation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of Journal of the Acoustical Society of of the Acoustical Society of the Acoustical Society of Acoustical Society of Society of of 4"¢#¢# 53. 12701287. 53. 12701287. 12701287. . . ;

Berliner, J. E., Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. J. E., Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. E., Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. Durlach, N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. N. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. 1., & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. & Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. Braida, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. D. (1977). Intensity perception. (1977). Intensity perception. Intensity perception. perception. VII. Further data on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and Further data on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and data on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and on roving-level discrimination and the resolution and roving-level discrimination and the resolution and discrimination and the resolution and and the resolution and the resolution and resolution and and bias edge effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, edge effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, of the Acoustical Society of America, 61, the Acoustical Society of America, 61, Acoustical Society of America, 61, Society of America, 61, of America, 61, America, 61, 61, 1577-1585.

Braida, L. D., & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution L. D., & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution D., & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution & Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution Durlach, N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution N. L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution L. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution Intensity perception. II. Resolution perception. II. Resolution II. Resolution Resolution in one-interval paradigms. Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, one-interval paradigms. Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, paradigms. Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, Acoustical Society ofAmerica, ofAmerica,America, 51, 483-502. 483-502.

& Purks, S. R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor Purks, S. R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor S. R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor R. (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor (1984}. Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor Intensity perception. XII. Perceptual anchor perception. XII. Perceptual anchor XII. Perceptual anchor Perceptual anchor anchor

395 

BOW EFFECTS IN ABSOLUTE IDENTIFICATION 

model of context-coding. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 76, 722-731.

| Marley, A. A. 1., & Cook, V. T. (1986). A limited capacity rehearsal model for psychophysical judgments applied to magnitude estimation. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 37, 136-151. Mathematical Psychology, 37, 136-151. Psychology, 37, 136-151. 37, 136-151. 136-151. 

Durlach, N. I, & Braida, L. D. (1969). Intensity perception. I. Preliminary of Mathematical Psychology, 37, 136-151. Mathematical Psychology, 37, 136-151. Psychology, 37, 136-151. 37, 136-151. 136-151. theory of intensity resolution. Journal of the Acoustical Society of | Marley, A. A. J.,& Lacouture, Y. (1991). Solving theN bit America, 46, 373-383. with one hidden unit and a maximum decoding one hidden unit and a maximum decoding hidden unit and a maximum decoding unit and a maximum decoding and a maximum decoding a maximum decoding maximum decoding decoding network. Unpublished

   of | Marley, A. A. J.,& Lacouture, Y. (1991). Solving theN bit | Marley, A. A. J.,& Lacouture, Y. (1991). Solving theN bit Marley, A. A. J.,& Lacouture, Y. (1991). Solving theN bit A. A. J.,& Lacouture, Y. (1991). Solving theN bit J.,& Lacouture, Y. (1991). Solving theN bit& Lacouture, Y. (1991). Solving theN bit Y. (1991). Solving theN bit (1991). Solving theN bit Solving theN bit theN bitN bit bit encoder problem with one hidden unit and a maximum decoding one hidden unit and a maximum decoding hidden unit and a maximum decoding unit and a maximum decoding and a maximum decoding a maximum decoding maximum decoding decoding network. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology, McGill University and Laboratoire de Recherche en Psychologie Cognitive, Université Laval.

   Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97,

Gravetter, F., & Lockhead, G. R. (1973). Criterial range as a frame of reference for stimulus judgment. Psychological Review, 80, 203-216. Hale, D. J. (1969). Speed-error tradeoffin three-choice serial reaction task. Acta Psychologica, $1, 428-435. 

Hick, W. E. (1952). On the rate of gain of information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 4, 11-26.

   Moni, S. (1989). A limited-capacity response process in absolute identification. Perception & Psychophysics, 46, 167-173.

   Murdock, B.B. (1960). The distinctiveness of stimuli. Psychological Review, 67, 16-31.

Hinton, G. E, & Shallice, T. (1991). Lesioning an attractor network: Investigations of acquired dyslexia. Psychological Review, 98, 74-95.

Johnson, G. I. (1991). A distinctiveness theory of serial learning. Psychological Review, 98, 204-217.

Kruglyak, L. (1990), How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two L. (1990), How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two (1990), How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two theW bit encoder problem with just twoW bit encoder problem with just two bit encoder problem with just two encoder problem with just two problem with just two with just two just two two hidden units. Neural Computation, 2, 399-401. units. Neural Computation, 2, 399-401. Neural Computation, 2, 399-401. Computation, 2, 399-401. 2, 399-401. 399-401.

Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton G. E., & Williams R. J. (1986). Learning internal representations by error propagation. In D. E. Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.}, Parallel Distributed Processing. Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, Vol. 1, (pp. 282-317). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Shiffrin, R. H.,& Nosofsky, R. M. (1994). Seven plus or minus two:A commentary on capacity limitations. Psychological Review, 101, 357-361, Stanovich, K. E., Pachella, R. G., & Smith, J. E. K. (1977). An analysis of confusion errors in naming letters under speed stress. Perception & Psychophysics, 21, 545-552. Stork, D. G., & Allen, J. D. (1993). How to solve the N bit encoder problem with just one hidden unit. Neurocomputing, 3, 141-143. Treisman, M.A. (1985). The magical number seven and some other features of category scaling: Properties of a model for absolute judgment. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 29, 175-230. 

Kruglyak, L. (1990), How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two L. (1990), How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two (1990), How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two How to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two to solve theW bit encoder problem with just two theW bit encoder problem with just twoW bit encoder problem with just two bit encoder problem with just two encoder problem with just two problem with just two with just two just two two hidden units. Neural Computation, 2, 399-401. units. Neural Computation, 2, 399-401. Neural Computation, 2, 399-401. Computation, 2, 399-401. 2, 399-401. 399-401.

Lacouture, Y. (1989). From mean square error to response time: A connectionist model of word recognition in Terry Sejnowsky (Ed.), Proceedings of the Second Summer School on Connectionist Models (pp. 371-378). Los Angeles: Morgan Kaufman.

Lacouture, Y. (1990}. Connectionist models of choice and reaction time in psychophysics and word recognition. Unpublished. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Psychology, McGill University.

Lacouture, Y. (1994). Comparing absolute identification and choice response time processes. Unpublished manuscript, Laboratoire de recherche en psychologie cognitive, Université Laval.

Lacouture, Y, & Marley, A. A. J. (£991). A connectionist model of choice and response time in absolute identification. Connection Science, 3, 401-433.

   Treisman M.A., & Faulkner, A. (1984). The setting and maintenance of criteria representing levels of confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 10, 119-1339.

   Ward, L. M., & Lockhead, G. R. (1970). Sequential effects and memory in category judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 84, 27-34.

   Ward, L. M., & Lockhead, G. R. (1971). Response system processes in absolute judgment. Perception & Psychophysics, 9, 73-78.

Laming, D. (1984). The relativity of “absolute” judgments, British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 37, 152-183.

Luce, R. D., Green, D. M., & Weber, D. L. (1976). Attention bands in absolute identification. Perception & Psychophysics, 59, 129-134.

Luce, R. D., Nosofsky, R. M., Green, D. M., & Smith, A. F. (1982). The bow and sequential effects in absolute identification. Perception & Psychophysics, 32, 397-408.

Marley, A. A. J., & Cook, V. T. (1984). A fixed rehearsal capacity interpretation of limits on absolute identification performance. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 30, 339-390.

Weber, D. L., Green, D. M., & Luce, R. D. (1977). Effects of practice and distribution of auditory signals on absolute identification. Perception & Psychophysics, 22, 223-231.

Received: June 22, 1994 

