10.1006/jmps.1995.1002
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 39, 3-20 (1995) 

Making Correct Statistical Inferences Using 

a Wrong Probability Model 

RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

University of Texas at Datfas 

garding the data and naturally incorporate those biases Large sample methods for estimating the variance of parameter directly into the data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is into the data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is the data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is analysis. Thus, the statistical model is Thus, the statistical model is the statistical model is statistical model is model is is estimates for hypothesis-testing purposes and statistical test for mode! 4 formal] instantiation of the experimenter’s psychological formal] instantiation of the experimenter’s psychological instantiation of the experimenter’s psychological of the experimenter’s psychological the experimenter’s psychological experimenter’s psychological psychological selection when the Statistical model is wrong {i.e., misspecified ) ae theories. Some examples of this strategy include the multi- Some examples of this strategy include the multi- examples of this strategy include the multi- of this strategy include the multi- this strategy include the multi- strategy include the multi- include the multi- the multi- multireviewed. A parallel distributed processing (PDP} statistical model for . . . analyzing categorical time series data is then proposed, and a theorem nomial models discussed by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), models discussed by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), discussed by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), Riefer and Batchelder (1988), and Batchelder (1988), Batchelder (1988), (1988), establishing when the quasi-maximum likelihood estimates of the linear causal path analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item causal path analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item path analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item Bentler, 1980), item 1980), item item model are unique is stated and proved. Analysis of Golden et al.'s response theory theory (e.g., Lord, 1980) for assessing assessing latent (1993, in the Proceedings of the 14th Annual Conference of the subject ability parameters, categorical time-series analysis ability parameters, categorical time-series analysis parameters, categorical time-series analysis categorical time-series analysis time-series analysis analysis Cognitive Science Society (PP. 487-491). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum) models for analyzing social interaction data (Allison & for analyzing social interaction data (Allison & analyzing social interaction data (Allison & social interaction data (Allison & interaction data (Allison & data (Allison & (Allison & & categorical time-series data with respect to the proposed PDP model ; ; _ showed that White's asymptotic statistical theory yielded results which Liker, 1982), hidden Markov models for speech recognition hidden Markov models for speech recognition Markov models for speech recognition models for speech recognition for speech recognition speech recognition recognition were More consistent with boot-strap estimates than classical methods _(e.g., Levinson ef a/. 1988), or the learning model described Levinson ef a/. 1988), or the learning model described ef a/. 1988), or the learning model described a/. 1988), or the learning model described 1988), or the learning model described or the learning model described the learning model described learning model described model described described of statistical inference. © 1995 Academic Press, Inc. by Falmagne et al. (1990). Falmagne et al. (1990). et al. (1990). al. (1990). (1990). 

directly into the data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is into the data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is the data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is data analysis. Thus, the statistical model is analysis. Thus, the statistical model is Thus, the statistical model is the statistical model is statistical model is model is is 4 formal] instantiation of the experimenter’s psychological formal] instantiation of the experimenter’s psychological instantiation of the experimenter’s psychological of the experimenter’s psychological the experimenter’s psychological experimenter’s psychological psychological theories. Some examples of this strategy include the multi- Some examples of this strategy include the multi- examples of this strategy include the multi- of this strategy include the multi- this strategy include the multi- strategy include the multi- include the multi- the multi- multi. . . nomial models discussed by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), models discussed by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), discussed by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), by Riefer and Batchelder (1988), Riefer and Batchelder (1988), and Batchelder (1988), Batchelder (1988), (1988), linear causal path analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item causal path analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item path analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item analysis models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item models (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item (e.g., Bentler, 1980), item Bentler, 1980), item 1980), item item response theory theory (e.g., Lord, 1980) for assessing assessing latent subject ability parameters, categorical time-series analysis ability parameters, categorical time-series analysis parameters, categorical time-series analysis categorical time-series analysis time-series analysis analysis models for analyzing social interaction data (Allison & for analyzing social interaction data (Allison & analyzing social interaction data (Allison & social interaction data (Allison & interaction data (Allison & data (Allison & (Allison & & ; ; _ Liker, 1982), hidden Markov models for speech recognition hidden Markov models for speech recognition Markov models for speech recognition models for speech recognition for speech recognition speech recognition recognition _(e.g., Levinson ef a/. 1988), or the learning model described Levinson ef a/. 1988), or the learning model described ef a/. 1988), or the learning model described a/. 1988), or the learning model described 1988), or the learning model described or the learning model described the learning model described learning model described model described described by Falmagne et al. (1990). Falmagne et al. (1990). et al. (1990). al. (1990). (1990). 

TTT 099099090 

The classical approach to hypothesis testing in complex statistical models is traditionally a two step procedure. First, the null hypothesis that the assumed statistical model Ould have generated the observed data is tested. If this null hypothesis is accepted, then the experimenter proceedsto the second step of the analysis. In the second step, specific Planned comparisons involving relations among the Stimated parameters are tested. Because the classical approach is based upon estimating the “true” parameters afd their associated variances and covariances, tests of specific planned comparisons are permitted only if the model “fits” the data. 

Ideally, a statistical analysis should be as “modelindependent” as possible, making a minimal number of assumptions about the nature of the data generating process. Such an analysis is exemplary of the classical data analysis approach. Unfortunately, however, such “ideal” analyses are usually not practical because (i) the data may be too “messy” to uniquely identify the nature of the data generating process, (ii) the experimenter may not be ableto “adequately control” critical factors influencing the data generating process, and (iii) it is impractical for the experimenter to collect a sufficient amount of data. In addition, consider the case of the experimenter who already has formulated a highly restricted class of alternative psychological theories regarding how the data were generated. The experimenter acknowledges that each theory in this class may not be correct in its entirety, but is simply interested in which theory is “closest” to the truth. Such models presumably reflect the experimenter’s biases 

The two step classical approach to hypothesis testing is problematic because the first step is based upon accepting the null hypothesis that the assumed statistical model actually generated the observed data. If, for example, the data were simply random noise, then the null hypothesis would be accepted because of the large standard errors associated with the parameter estimates of the model. On the other hand, if the model was a truly superb model of the dataGefects, generating process the null hypothesis with could negligible be rejected minor if “too structural much . data” is collected. 

{am grateful to Bill Batchelder, A. A. J. Marley, Stephen Hayes, and especially two anonymous reviewers for their comments on earlier versions of this article. Some of the ideas regarding a connectionist interpretation of a probabilistic category choice model evolved from discussions with Dr. Daviddoctoral Rumelhart while the authorwas a National Institute of Health postfellow at Stanford University in 1989-1990. Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Richard Golden, University of Texas at Dallas, School of Human Development, GR41, Box 830688, Richardson, Texas, 75083-0688. E-mail address: golden @utdallas.edu. 

A probability model is a collection of probability distribution functions which are indexed by the probability model’s parameters. If the data generating process is not . . . +: contained in a particular probability model, then that prob2bility model is referred to as a “misspecified model.” To avoid the presence of some forms of model misspecification, 

3 

0022-2496/95 $6.00 

Copyright © 1995 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 

4 

RICHARD M, GOLDEN 

additional parameters may be introduced into the model. The addition of such parameters is helpful since this increases the “flexibility” of the mode) to fit the data, but usually has the unfortunate consequences of (1) decreasing the power of model-based statistical tests and (11) increasing the difficulty of developing simple, insightful models with smal! numbers of interpretable parameters. 

mechanism for model improvement and data analysis even when the “best” model is not completely accurate in all its details. 

This article is organized into two major sections. The purpose of the first part of this article is to select, review, and discuss issues associated with evaluating probability models and constructing asymptotic statistical tests within a framework of model misspecification. In the second part of of model misspecification. In the second part of model misspecification. In the second part of misspecification. In the second part of In the second part of the second part of second part of part of of article, a parallel distributed processing (PDP) model a parallel distributed processing (PDP) model parallel distributed processing (PDP) model distributed processing (PDP) model processing (PDP) model (PDP) model model for analyzing categorical time series data is proposed. A analyzing categorical time series data is proposed. A categorical time series data is proposed. A time series data is proposed. A series data is proposed. A data is proposed. A is proposed. A proposed. A A theorem ts then stated and proved concerning the unique- ts then stated and proved concerning the unique- then stated and proved concerning the unique- stated and proved concerning the unique- and proved concerning the unique- proved concerning the unique- concerning the unique- the unique- uniqueness of the parameter estimates of the PDP model. The of the parameter estimates of the PDP model. The the parameter estimates of the PDP model. The parameter estimates of the PDP model. The estimates of the PDP model. The of the PDP model. The the PDP model. The PDP model. The model. The The PDP model is then used to examine temporal! regularities in model is then used to examine temporal! regularities in is then used to examine temporal! regularities in then used to examine temporal! regularities in used to examine temporal! regularities in to examine temporal! regularities in examine temporal! regularities in temporal! regularities in regularities in in human free-recall data of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) free-recall data of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) data of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) short stories (Golden et al., 1993) stories (Golden et al., 1993) (Golden et al., 1993) et al., 1993) al., 1993) 1993) in order to show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s order to show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s to show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s how Vuong’s and White’s Vuong’s and White’s and White’s White’s asymptotic statistical theories may be applied to derive new statistical theories may be applied to derive new theories may be applied to derive new may be applied to derive new be applied to derive new applied to derive new to derive new derive new new statistical tests for the proposed PDP model and (i) for the proposed PDP model and (i) the proposed PDP model and (i) proposed PDP model and (i) PDP model and (i) model and (i) and (i) (i) evaluate the asymptotic asymptotic statistical theory proposed by theory proposed by proposed by by Vuong and White with respect to both boot-strap simula- and White with respect to both boot-strap simula- White with respect to both boot-strap simula- with respect to both boot-strap simula- respect to both boot-strap simula- to both boot-strap simula- both boot-strap simula- boot-strap simula- simulations and the classical asymptotic statistical theory. and the classical asymptotic statistical theory. the classical asymptotic statistical theory. classical asymptotic statistical theory. asymptotic statistical theory. statistical theory. theory. 

Recently, methods of hypothesis testing (White, 1982, framework of model misspecification. In the second part of of model misspecification. In the second part of model misspecification. In the second part of misspecification. In the second part of In the second part of the second part of second part of part of of 1989, in press) and model selection (Vuong, 1989) have _ this article, a parallel distributed processing (PDP) model a parallel distributed processing (PDP) model parallel distributed processing (PDP) model distributed processing (PDP) model processing (PDP) model (PDP) model model been developed which are applicable in cases where a given for analyzing categorical time series data is proposed. A analyzing categorical time series data is proposed. A categorical time series data is proposed. A time series data is proposed. A series data is proposed. A data is proposed. A is proposed. A proposed. A A statistical model is misspecified in particular ways. Such theorem ts then stated and proved concerning the unique- ts then stated and proved concerning the unique- then stated and proved concerning the unique- stated and proved concerning the unique- and proved concerning the unique- proved concerning the unique- concerning the unique- the unique- uniquemethods provide a mechanism for testing statistical ness of the parameter estimates of the PDP model. The of the parameter estimates of the PDP model. The the parameter estimates of the PDP model. The parameter estimates of the PDP model. The estimates of the PDP model. The of the PDP model. The the PDP model. The PDP model. The model. The The hypotheses directly without requiring the assumption that PDP model is then used to examine temporal! regularities in model is then used to examine temporal! regularities in is then used to examine temporal! regularities in then used to examine temporal! regularities in used to examine temporal! regularities in to examine temporal! regularities in examine temporal! regularities in temporal! regularities in regularities in in the proposed statistical model is correctly specified with human free-recall data of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) free-recall data of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) data of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) of short stories (Golden et al., 1993) short stories (Golden et al., 1993) stories (Golden et al., 1993) (Golden et al., 1993) et al., 1993) al., 1993) 1993) respect to the data generating process. Thus, the researcher in order to show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s order to show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s to show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s show (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s (i) explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s explicitly how Vuong’s and White’s how Vuong’s and White’s Vuong’s and White’s and White’s White’s can “separate” the model building and evaluation problem asymptotic statistical theories may be applied to derive new statistical theories may be applied to derive new theories may be applied to derive new may be applied to derive new be applied to derive new applied to derive new to derive new derive new new from the hypothesis testing problem. Another way to think _ statistical tests for the proposed PDP model and (i) for the proposed PDP model and (i) the proposed PDP model and (i) proposed PDP model and (i) PDP model and (i) model and (i) and (i) (i) about this approach to statistical inference is that issues of evaluate the asymptotic asymptotic statistical theory proposed by theory proposed by proposed by by “model validity” and “model reliability” are separated. In Vuong and White with respect to both boot-strap simula- and White with respect to both boot-strap simula- White with respect to both boot-strap simula- with respect to both boot-strap simula- respect to both boot-strap simula- to both boot-strap simula- both boot-strap simula- boot-strap simula- simulathe classical hypothesis testing framework, reliable tions and the classical asymptotic statistical theory. and the classical asymptotic statistical theory. the classical asymptotic statistical theory. classical asymptotic statistical theory. asymptotic statistical theory. statistical theory. theory. estimates of the sampling variance of a model parameter cannot be obtained in the presence of model misspecificaA REVIEW OF THE MISSPECIFIED tion. Hypothesis testing in a model misspecification MODEL FRAMEWORK framework, however, permits reliable estimates of the sampling variance of a model parameter to be obtained even if White’s (in press) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) (in press) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) press) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) (also see White, 1982, 1989) see White, 1982, 1989) White, 1982, 1989) 1982, 1989) 1989) the model itself is not completely correct! In fact, if the provides a comprehensive introduction to the literature of a comprehensive introduction to the literature of comprehensive introduction to the literature of introduction to the literature of to the literature of the literature of literature of of experimenter has two competing models (each of which is making correct statistical inferences in the presence of correct statistical inferences in the presence of statistical inferences in the presence of inferences in the presence of in the presence of the presence of presence of of misspecified), Wuong’s (1989) statistical framework may be model misspecification. To simplify the presentation of the misspecification. To simplify the presentation of the To simplify the presentation of the simplify the presentation of the presentation of the of the the used to decide which of the two competing models is most important ideas behind a model misspecification framework ideas behind a model misspecification framework behind a model misspecification framework a model misspecification framework model misspecification framework misspecification framework framework consistent with the data. approach, the discussion is limited to probability mass func- the discussion is limited to probability mass func- discussion is limited to probability mass func- is limited to probability mass func- limited to probability mass func- probability mass func- mass func- func- 

White’s (in press) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) (in press) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) press) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) book (also see White, 1982, 1989) (also see White, 1982, 1989) see White, 1982, 1989) White, 1982, 1989) 1982, 1989) 1989) provides a comprehensive introduction to the literature of a comprehensive introduction to the literature of comprehensive introduction to the literature of introduction to the literature of to the literature of the literature of literature of of making correct statistical inferences in the presence of correct statistical inferences in the presence of statistical inferences in the presence of inferences in the presence of in the presence of the presence of presence of of model misspecification. To simplify the presentation of the misspecification. To simplify the presentation of the To simplify the presentation of the simplify the presentation of the presentation of the of the the important ideas behind a model misspecification framework ideas behind a model misspecification framework behind a model misspecification framework a model misspecification framework model misspecification framework misspecification framework framework approach, the discussion is limited to probability mass func- the discussion is limited to probability mass func- discussion is limited to probability mass func- is limited to probability mass func- limited to probability mass func- probability mass func- mass func- funcdefined on finite sample spaces. The generalization to on finite sample spaces. The generalization to finite sample spaces. The generalization to sample spaces. The generalization to spaces. The generalization to The generalization to generalization to to the case of probability density functions is straightforward and is thoroughly discussed by White (1982, 1989, in press). White (in press) also shows to relax considerably many of the assumptions made for expository reasons in this review. 

beOne important limitation of these methods which shouldOne important limitation of these methods which should important limitation of these methods which should limitation of these methods which should of these methods which should these methods which should methods which should which should should _ tions defined on finite sample spaces. The generalization to on finite sample spaces. The generalization to finite sample spaces. The generalization to sample spaces. The generalization to spaces. The generalization to The generalization to generalization to to kept in mind is that these methods are based upon “large sample” approximations which are only valid for large data sets. The question of “how large,” however, is an empirical question which is discussed in greater detail later by considering alternative “checks” on the asymptotic approximations using Efron’s (1982) “boot-strap” methodology. Another important limitation of the proposed model misspecification framework is that the process which generates the data must satisfy certain mild restrictions. For example, both the proposed statistical model and the data generating model are assumed to generate independent and identically distributed (ii.d.) observations from the same sample space (see White, in press, for less restrictive conditions). The proposed probability model and data generating model must also satisfy additional technical restrictions which usually are satisfied in practice. A third important limitation of the model misspecification framework is that it only addresses the “reliability” issue regarding data analysis, and it cannot be assumed to apply to issues of model “validity.” Thatat is,j the problem of developing; good parsimonious. . mathematical models which fit the data certainly does not disappear within the model misspecification framework. Rather, the model misspecification framework provides a 

beOne important limitation of these methods which shouldOne important limitation of these methods which should important limitation of these methods which should limitation of these methods which should of these methods which should these methods which should methods which should which should should _ tions defined on finite sample spaces. The generalization to on finite sample spaces. The generalization to finite sample spaces. The generalization to sample spaces. The generalization to spaces. The generalization to The generalization to generalization to to 

Hypothesis Testing in the Presence of Model Misspecification 

DEFINITION 1. A probability mass function, p, on a finite sample space 2 whose elements are real-valued vectors satisfies (i) for xeE2, O<p{x)<i, and (ii) Dixea P(x) = 1. 

DEFINITION 2 (Adapted from Vuong (1989)), Let a sample space @ bea finite set of real-valued vectors. A probability mass model, F,,, is a set of probability mass functions on &. In addition, the elements of F,,are indexed by the real-valued parameter vector we W so that a given element of W refers to the specific probability mass function ; q(-, w)é Fy. 

Note that unlike the classical approach to statistical inference, two types of distinct probability mass functions are defined right from the beginning. The unobservable 

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 

5 

environmental distribution, p., which is the data generating process, and the model probability mass function, g(-,w), which is an element of a specific probability model. If the environmental distribution is contained in the probability model, then this corresponds to the classical case. In general, however, the environmental distribution is not contained in the probability model and this is the common case of using a “wrong” or “misspecified” probability model. When working in a model misspecification framework, it is extremely important to be clear about the distinction between the probability model whose parameters are being estimated and the probability distribution which is generating the observations. For this reason, the concept of model misspecification is now formally defined. 

(2). Maximum likelihood estimates can be shown (under fairly general conditions) to be asymptotically consistent and efficient (Manoukian, 1986; Van Trees, 1968). Moreover, it can be shown that maximum likelihood estimates converge to maximum a posteriori (MAP) (L«., most probable) estimates under fairly general conditions {Van Trees, 1986). 

If a probability mass model Fy is misspecified with respect to an environmental! probability mass function, p., then the concept of a “true” parameter vector w has no meaning. It is therefore convenient to define the goal of the statistical inference process so that a parameter vector w is sought such that an appropriate measure of the distance between the misspecified probability mass model F,, and the yon provaeny mass function Ph isme mize in 8 ction, me stance measure Siow © automatically” consistent with the classical theory so that fin fact the probability mass model F,,.is correctly specified Ban TaCt Tae propabullly Mass w 48 Correctly Specnile with respect to p., then the global minima of the distance measure should yield maximum likelihood estimates. 

DEFINITION 3. Let Fy, be a probability mass model. Let p, be an environmental probability mass function. Then Fy, j ; ; is correctly specified with respect to p. ifp.¢Fy, and F,, is misspecified (i.e., incorrectly specified) with respect to p, if Po ¢F Sw: 

Let X),X2,..,X, be m iid. observations from p,. The likelihood of the ith observation, x,, is g(x,;; w) for model probability mass function g{-; 1). Moreover, since the x observations are iid., the likelihood of the set of observations, X,, ...,.X,, 18 given by 

Given these considerations, it seems natural to consider the KLIC function in (3) as an appropriate measure of the distance between the environmental distribution, p,, and the probability model F,,. Following Kullback and Leibler (1951), the following points must be made about the KLIC as a distance measure. First, the KLIC is not a metric on probability mass functions since it is not symmetric with respect to the environmental and model probability distributions and does not satisfy the triangle inequality. Second, the KLIC distance measure in (3) is never directly observable since p, is never directly observable. The third and most relevant property is that if the environmental probability distribution, p,, and probability model, g(-, w), are equivalent, then the KLIC distance between these two distributions obtains its minimum value (Kullback & Leibler, 1951). On the other hand, the KLIC distance function has the following very important property. If the model is correctly specified, minimizing the sample KLIC distance measure in (2) is equivalent to maximizing the log likelihood function (ie., classical maximum likelihood function (ie., classical maximum likelihood (ie., classical maximum likelihood classical maximum likelihood maximum likelihood likelihood estimation). 

==> picture [161 x 34] <==

. ; 

. 

; 

since the observations are assumed to be statistically independent. In order to maximize L, with respect 10 Wy, 11S often convenient to define a monotonically decreasing function of L,,, E(w), given by 

==> picture [198 x 51] <==

White likelihood function (ie., classical maximum likelihood function (ie., classical maximum likelihood (ie., classical maximum likelihood classical maximum likelihood maximum likelihood likelihood to (1982) shows that £, converges with probability one estimation). a fixed function, E, of w as » becomes sufficiently large In classical maximum likelihood estimation, it can be classical maximum likelihood estimation, it can be maximum likelihood estimation, it can be likelihood estimation, it can be it can be can be be under certain regularity conditions. In particular, the funcshown that the maximum likelihood estimates are normally that the maximum likelihood estimates are normally maximum likelihood estimates are normally likelihood estimates are normally estimates are normally are normally normally tion E is called the Kullback-Leibler (1951) information — distributed about the true parameter values with covariance criterion (KLIC}, and is given by matrix equal to the inverse of the Fisher information matrix equal to the inverse of the Fisher information matrix to the inverse of the Fisher information matrix the inverse of the Fisher information matrix the Fisher information matrix Fisher information matrix information matrix matrix 

In classical maximum likelihood estimation, it can be classical maximum likelihood estimation, it can be maximum likelihood estimation, it can be likelihood estimation, it can be it can be can be be shown that the maximum likelihood estimates are normally that the maximum likelihood estimates are normally maximum likelihood estimates are normally likelihood estimates are normally estimates are normally are normally normally — distributed about the true parameter values with covariance distributed about the true parameter values with covariance about the true parameter values with covariance the true parameter values with covariance true parameter values with covariance parameter values with covariance values with covariance with covariance matrix equal to the inverse of the Fisher information matrix equal to the inverse of the Fisher information matrix to the inverse of the Fisher information matrix the inverse of the Fisher information matrix the Fisher information matrix Fisher information matrix information matrix matrix (Manoukian, 1986; Van Trees, 1986). White’s (1982, 1989, in press) theorems provide a natural generalization of these results to the case where the true parameter values do not exist! In particular, White demonstrates that what he defines as quasi-maximum likelihood estimates ({ie., parameter estimates that obtain a global minimum of the sample loss function £,,) are both consistent (also see Huber, 1967) and asymptotically normally distributed with respect to the global minimum of the KLIC, £, with a 

==> picture [195 x 23] <==

In this article, (2) is referred to as the sample loss function, while (3) is referred to as the true /oss function. 

In classical maximum likelihood estimation, the maximum likelihood estimates (MLEs) are those parameters which maximize L,, in (1) or equivalently minimize E,, in 

6 

RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

covariance matrix which is closely related (but not identical) to the inverse of the Fisher information matrix. Itisalso important to note that if the probability model happens to be correctly specified, then White’s results reduce to the classical maximum likelihood estimation case. 

The following two theorems by White (1989; also see White, 1982, in press} summarize these important theoretical results and also provide an explicit procedure for estimating the asymptotic distribution of quasi-maximum likelihood estimates. Again, simplified versions for finite sample spaces of the relevant theorems of White are presented for expository reasons. Generalizations of these results to other important cases such as continuous-valued random variables (White, 1982, 1989) or observations which are not independently distributed (White, 1982, 1989, in press) are available. 

THEOREM 1 (White, 1989, Theorem 1). Let the observations, {X,,..,X,} with x,eR8%, be iid. according to an environmental probability mass function, p., defined on a finite sample space Q. Let 

==> picture [130 x 27] <==

==> picture [14 x 11] <==

be a probability mass model where W is a compact subset of a. finite-dimensional Euclidean space and q(-, w) is a probability A mass function on Q for each we W. Let E,, and E(w) be defined respectively as in (2) and (3) with respect to F,, and Pe. Let W, be a strict global minimum of £,,(w) on W. Then for each n=), 2,..., W, exists and has the property that W,—2 1* with. probabilityone, where I°* is; the set of global minimaof E(w) on W. 

This theorem (White (1989, Theorem | )} states that given an environmental probability distribution, p., which generates a set of independently and identically distributed vectors {x,,.., x, }, one can construct a sample loss function, E(w), which gradually approximates the true loss function, E(w), more and more accurately with high probability as the number of observations, n, becomes large. Moreover, White’s (1989) Theorem 1 says that any strict local minimum of the sample loss function converges with probability one to a set of strict local minima of the true loss function as the number of observations becomes large. Note that the concept of “converge with probability one to a set” means that either (1) the stochastic process willconvergetoamember of the set or (ii) the stochastic process may oscillate among the members of the set. It is also important to note that although g(-; w) can be misspecified with respect to probability model F,,, Eq. (4) requires that Fy, be defined on the same sample space as p,.. 

The next theorem (a special case of White’s (1989) Theorem 2; also see White, 1982, in press) shows how the asymptotic distribution of the parameter estimates may be derived from a differentiable probability model. 

THEOREM 2 (White, 1989, Theorem 2). Let the observations {x,...,X,} with x,eB% be iid. according to an environmental probability mass function, p,, defined on a finite sample space Q. Let 

==> picture [191 x 11] <==

¢ @ probability mass model where W isa compact subset of 4 finite dimensional Euclidean space and q(.; w) is a probabil#1” mass function on Q for each we W. Assume that W,, converges with probability one as n increases to an isolated strict /0bal minimum in W, w*, of the KLICfunction in (3) with respect to q(-; w) é Fy, and p,. In addition, let q(x; -) for each *€ Q have continuous first and second partial derivatives on . Also assume that 

==> picture [142 x 21] <==

and 

==> picture [227 x 27] <==

V2are log{ non-singular4ew \] matrices, are the first where anpendV,,lo Lasx; w*yeand of 1 * - . Tso ; og g(x; -)] evaluated at w* and a’ indicates the transpose of vector a. Then as n increases, Jn, —w*) converges in distribution to a multivariate normal distribution with zero mean and ae tk ~ covariance matrix C™*, where 

==> picture [169 x 17] <==

addition, as n increases, 

==> picture [160 x 13] <==

converges with probability one to C*, where 

==> picture [193 x 25] <==

and 

==> picture [252 x 25] <==

This theorem says that given an environmental probability distribution which generates a set of independently and identically distributed vectors {x,,..,x,}, then one can construct a sample loss function, £,(w), as before. Now assume that a strict local minimum, w,, of the sample loss function is in fact converging to a specific strict local minimum, w*, of the true loss function, £(w* ), as the number of 

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 

7 

observations, , becomes large. Given this critical assumption and assuming that n is sufficiently large, then this Gaussiantheorem shows with mean that the w* and asymptotic covariance distribution matrix Cinof NoteWw, that C* is never directly observable, but White shows that the estimator C,, in (7) converges with probability one to the true value c™ Also note that according to the classical theory of maximum likelihood estimation (e.g. Van Trees, 1986, Wilks, 1962), if the model is correctly specified then theUsing Fisher information matrix equality (Ay= ~B,a) holds. Thus, this equality in (7), we obtain C= Tan =B, White’s (1982, 1989) asymptotic statistical theory reduces to the well-known result that the maximum likelihood estimates are asymptotically distributed about their true values with covariance matrix — A, =8, (Riefer & Batchelder, 1988; Van Trees, 1968; Wilks, 1962). The first derivative of the sample loss function (ie., the gradient) should be empirically checked to assess whether the parameter estimates, Wr are sufficiently close to their true; values, w*.i If —A* is positive definite,; ; then; w* is a strict local minimum and “locally unique.” If B* is also nonsingular, then the covariance matrix C* is non-singular as well. The non-singularity of C* is a necessary condition for hypothesis-testing. Note that the non-singularity of A* and B* can be empirically checked by examining the rank of A, and &,. Finally, it is helpful to note that if the number of parameters of the model is greater than the number of observations, then &, will always be singular. 

which may be written as 

Ww, is, 

==> picture [247 x 45] <==

Inspection of (11) shows that V,,£,(w*) has been expressed as the average of independent and identically distributed random vectors, so Jn V,,£,(w*) is asymptotically normally distributed with mean vector zero and covariance matrix &* by the central limit theorem (see Appendix 3 of White, in press, for an overview of such central limit theorems). Also, since Jn V,£,(w*) is asymptotically normally distributed and A*~—' is a full rank symmetric linear transformation, /n(,,—w*) is also asymptotically normally distributed with mean vector zero and covariance matrix C* = A*~!B* A*—! by (10). 

Model Selection in the Presence of Model 

Miisspecification; ; 

This section deals with the problem of deciding which of two probability models is most consistent with a particular set of data. Currently most researchers in the field of mathematical psychology (e.g., Allison & Liker, 1982; Bentler, 1980; Falmagne ef ai., 1990; Lord, 1980) have used Wilk’s (1938) generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT) for making decisions of this type. 

To understand why White’s (1989) Theorem 2 works, a heuristic proof of White’s (1989} Theorem 2 is now presented following the discussion in White (in press, Chap. 6). The first step is to do a mean value (Taylor series) expansion of the gradient of the sample loss function about w* and evaluate the gradient of the sample loss function at #,. This can be done since it is assumed that #, is sufficiently close to w*, and the gradient of the sample loss function has continuous first derivatives. Let 4, =|#,—w*|, then 

To review the GLRT, the following notation is introduced following Vuong (1989). Let Fy, and Gy be two probability models. If F,,< Gy, then we say that Fy, is fully nested within G, and refer to G,-as the full model. In order to correctly use the GLRT to compare two alternative probability models it is absolutely necessary that (1) one probability model be fully nested within the other probability model, and (ii) the full probability model must be correctly specified with respect to the environmental probability distribution (i.e., the data generating process) (e.g., White, 1982; Voung, 1989). In general, it is unrealistic to expect that assumption (ii) will be satisfied for substantiative statistical models of complex psychological phenomena containing small numbers of interpretable parameters. In addition, assumption (i) is rather restrictive since one could imagine many situations where the experimental psychologist would want to decide which of two alternative non-nested probabilistic models “best fits” a specific data sample. 

==> picture [250 x 14] <==

and since V,,£., (#,,) vanishes, 

==> picture [204 x 13] <==

Also since —V2.F,,(w*)— A* with probability one by the strong law of large numbers, 

==> picture [153 x 13] <==

Vuong (1989) has introduced a general asymptotic statistical theory for probability model selection which allows one to compare two alternative probability models which (i) are not necessarily nested and (11) may be misspecified with respect to the environmental probability distribution. Moreover, Vuong (1989) shows how his genera] asymptotic statistical theory for probability model selection 

with probability one for n sufficiently large. Note that A* is non-singular so the inverse of A* always exists. Now, premultiply each side by [A*]7' to obtain 

==> picture [209 x 13] <==

8 

RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

is formally equivalent to GLRT in the special case where probability distribution F', is fully nested in probability distribution Gy, and Gy is correctly specified. 

reviews Vuong’s (1989) general asymptotic statistical theory which is applicable to situations where (i) the probability models are not necessarily fully nested and (ii) it is not required that either of the probability models is correctly 

The basic idea behind Vuong’s (1989) theory is to compute the KLIC distance of each of the two probability the KLIC distance of each of the two probability KLIC distance of each of the two probability distance of each of the two probability of each of the two probability each of the two probability of the two probability the two probability two probability probability — specified. models with respect to the environmental probability distribution. The model whose KLIC distance to the environmental distribution is shortest is considered to be the better model. Or in other words, the likelihood of the dataiscomputed using probability model F,-and then computed using probability model G,. The model which makes the data most likely is then chosen. 

pute the KLIC distance of each of the two probability the KLIC distance of each of the two probability KLIC distance of each of the two probability distance of each of the two probability of each of the two probability each of the two probability of the two probability the two probability two probability probability — specified. 

Finally, the following notation is used throughout the next several sections. Let #, > y* and #,-w* as now with probability one. The estimated KLIC distance of ¢,{-; w*) to p, is given by 

==> picture [202 x 36] <==

More formally, let g,(-; w)e Fy and q,(-;y)eGy be probability mass (or density) functions on a particular sample space. Let p, be the environmental probability mass (or density) function which generates the observations {x,,.., x, }. Let w* be a strict local minimum of the KLIC, E’(w), between g ,(-; w) and p,. Lety* bea strict local minimum of the KLIC, E*(y), between ¢,(-;y) and p,. Now following Wilk’s (1938) generalized likelihood ratio testand Vuong’s (1989) statistical theory, form the log likelihood ratio 

and the estimated KLIC distance of g,(-; y*) to p, is given by . 

==> picture [202 x 27] <==

The estimated log likelihood ratio is given by 

==> picture [100 x 16] <==

==> picture [174 x 15] <==

The Fully Nested and Correctly Specified Case (GLRT). When the two probability models F,, and Gy pave the properties that (i) F< Gy and (ii) G, is correctly specified, then the GLRT is applicable given that some additional “regularity” conditions are satisfied (Wilks, 1938; seeThese Vuong, additional 1989, for “regularity” a presentation usi conditios n g essentially modern not a tion).ssume that certain expectations (taken with respect to the environmental probability distribution) of the probability distributions associated with Fw and G, exist and are sufficiently iooth. According to Wilk’s (1938) generalized likelihood ratio test (also Vuong, 1989), ~2n5), has an asymptotic chi square distribution with p —g degrees of freedom where is the dimensionality of the full model parameter vector, y, ang g is the dimensionality of the reduced model parameter Vector w. 

and ; choose model Fy if D>0 and model Gy if D<0. In practice, Dis not directly observable so the asymptotic distribution of an appropriate estimate of D is required for hypothesis testing purposes. 

, Note that Vuong’s (1989) model selection theory 1s still applicable if the parameter vectors are globally identifiable (i.e, w™ and y * are merely strict focal minima). In this “locally identifiable” case, however, the Set Fy contams only probability mass (or density) functions of the form qy{-, w) such that w is in a sufficiently small neighborhood of w*. Similarly, the set Gy contains only probability mass (or density) functions of the form q,(-, y) such that y isin a sufficiently small neighborhood of y*. From a practical perspective, this means that the algorithm used to search for w* and y* is implicitly involved in the model identification process. This issue is relevant to certain types of connectionist models, such as the back-propagation algorithm (Rumelhart et al. 1986), which are usually not globally identifiable. . BS The goal of this section is to informally review Vuong’s (1989) asymptotic statistical theory. Readers interested in additional details are urged to consult Vuong (1989). Towards this end, this section of the article is divided into three parts. In the first part, Wilk’s (1938) GLRT is briefly and informally reviewed. In the second part, Vuong’s (1989) statistical test for comparing two probability models which are known to be strictly non-nested is briefly and informally reviewed. The probability models are not required to be correctly specified in this case. The third part of this section 

To use the GLRT, one therefore follows the following procedure. First, compute quasi-maximum likelihood gctimates $, and W, for each of the two probability models G, and Fy. Second, check that the full model G , provides a good fit to the data. Third, use a standard cumulative chisquare distribution table to compute the critical value, 72(p —4q), which has the property that a chi-square random variable with p — q degrees of freedom will exceed x2(p ~ gq) with probability (significance level) «. Fourth, reject the null hypothesis that F,,,and G, are equally distant from p, if the statistic 

==> picture [53 x 14] <==

exceeds the critical value y2( p —q). 

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 

9 

The Strictly Non-nested Case. Now consider the strictly non-nested case where qg,(-; w*) and q,(-; y*) are notidentical functions on Q. In addition, this section allows either Fy or Gy to be misspecified with respect to the environmental probability distribution. Again, specific regularity conditions concerned with the existence and smoothness of certain types of expectations of the probability functions in Fy, and Gy with respect to the environmental distribution are assumed to be satisfied. 

Define 

==> picture [236 x 46] <==

Also let D, be defined as in (15). For the strictly non-nested case, Vuong (1989) proved that as n increases, the model selection statistic 

==> picture [164 x 23] <==

converges in distribution to a normally distributed random variable with mean zero and variance one in the case that Fy and Gy are equally distant from the environmental distribution, p,. The derivation of the asymptotic distribution of V,, is based upon the idea that (15) is the average of n independent and identically distributed random variables. Thus, 5, has a Gaussian distribution with variance as in (16) by the central limit theorem (see White, in press, for a review of such theorems). 

Thus to decide which oftwo strictly non-nested probabil. ity models “best fits” the data, the following computationally simple hypothesis-testing procedure may be used. First, compute quasi-maximum likelihood estimates f, and %,, for each of the two probability models G, and F,,. Second, let Z, be defined such that the probability that a normally distributed random variable with mean zero and variance one has a magnitude greater than Z, is «. Third, compute V7, as in (17). Then decide Fy, and G , are equally distant from p, (ie., Hy: D=0) if |P,,|<Z,. Decide Fy, is closer to p, than G, (ie, H-: D>0)if V,,>Z,.And finally, decide G, is closer to p, than Fy (ie, Ho: D<0) if Vi< —-Z,. 

The General Case. This section considers the most general case where the probability models F,,, and Gy; may be either (1) correctly specified or misspecified, and (it) the nesting relationship between the two probability models is unknown. Again certain regularity conditions concerned with the existence and smoothness of certain expectations of the probability functions in F,, and Gy are assumed (see Vuong, 1989, for additional! details). 

Vuong’s (1989) hypothesis-testing procedure for the general case is organized into two distinct stages. In the first stage, a statistical test called the “variance test” (reviewed in Appendix 3) is done to decide if the two probability models, F, and Gy,, are strictly non-nested (ie. decide if H,: D=0). If the null hypothesis of the variance test 1s rejected, then conclude that Fy, and Gy are strictly nonnested and proceed to the second stage of the analysis where the statistical test for strictly non-nested models is then done. The second stage of the analysis is then used to decide whether (i) model Fj, is better than model Gy, (11) model Gy is better than F,,,, or (iii) the information in the data set is not sufficient for deciding which model is better. 

Two important additional comments also need to be made. First, Vuong (1989) shows that if the significance level for the variance test is « and the significance level for the strictly non-nested test is a, then the significance level for the entire two-stage procedure is no larger than a. And second, it should be emphasized that the variance test is a complex statistica! test which requires more computational resources than the second stage of Vuong’s (1989) analysis. Fortunately, the variance test can be replaced with any alternative statistical test or analysis to decide if q,(-; w*) 4nd ¢,(-; y*) are equivalent (Vuong, 1989, Lemma 4.1). 

Validity of the Asymptotic Approximations 

Both White's (1982, 1989, in press) theory of covariance ™atrix estimation and Vuong’s (1989) theory of model Selection are based upon approximations which are only Valid for sufficiently large numbers of observations. In this section, a computer simulation methodology is introduced for empirically checking the validity of these proposed asymptotic approximations for specific probability models and specific data sets. _ 

The typical approach to checking the validity of @S8ymptotic approximations 1s to choose some “true” Parameters for the assumed probability distribution, generate sample observations from that distribution, and Select one sample of size n from the generated data. Then, for that sample of size n, the parameters and _ their @S8ymptotic variance are estimated using either the 4Symptotic approximations proposed by White (1982, 1989, i press) or Vuong (1989). From this information, the parameter estimates and their standard errors can be computed from the data sample using classical asymptotic statistical theory and compared to the original “true” parameters. 

This typical Monte Carlo approach will not work, however, when one assumes that the parameterized probability model may be misspecified because the typical Monte Carlo approach automatically guarantees that the probability model is correctly specified! An alternative to the typical Monte Carlo approach is the boot-strap 

10 

RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

approach proposed by Efron (1982). The basic idea of the boot strap approach is to use actual data, x), ...,x,, to empirically estimate the environmental probability distribution by assuming that the probability of x, (j= 1, ...”) is equal to I/n. For example, if the data consisted of the observations 2, 3, 3,3, then the probability of an observation with value 3 would be estimated to be 

The Parameter Estimation Problem 

. oo. The practical application of the asymptotic model misspecification theory reviewed here depends upon finding a strict local minimum, Wr of the sample KLIC function. Numerical methods for finding such minima of the sample KLIC function are well-known in the optimization and neutral network literature (e.g. Golden, 1988a, 1988b, 1988c; Luenberger, 1984; White, 1989). 

==> picture [54 x 13] <==

For example, a gradient descent type scheme may be used which has the form 

since observations x,, x3, and x, have the same value, 3. More generally, suppose the environmental probability distribution has the parametric form p(x,;)=p, (/=1, .., M) where the free parameters p, satisfy (1) 0< p,;<1 and (ii) >i, p,=l. Let x’ denote the /th value of the random variable of interest. Then it is not difficult to show that the quasi-maximum likelihood estimate, ,, ofp,;is given by the relative frequency of occurrence of x! in the data sample. 

==> picture [177 x 15] <==

where w#° is an initial guess about the parameter vector values and wW’ is the estimate of the parameter values at iteration j of the algorithm. The sequence of step constants, _»,, 72, ..., is determined at each step of the algorithm so that y, is a global minimum of £,,(#‘,). The quantity VE, (#,) is the derivative of the loss function E,,(w) with respect to the parameter vector w evaluated at the current estimate, #0, of the parameter vector w. Of course the problem with any numerical scheme is that there will always be an intrinsic error associated with the parameter estimation process which is a source of error in the resulting parameter estimates. It should be clear at this point that this intrinsic numerical error due to computational limitations in exactly computing w#,, has been assumed to be significantly smaller in magnitude than the sampling error (ie. the error associated with minimizing the sample KLIC function rather than the true KLIC function). 

Given an estimated environmental probability distribution, one then generates sample observations and selects K samples of size n from the generated data. Then, with respect to the ith sample (i= 1, ..., K) of size n, the quasi-maximum likelihood estimates #‘, are computed. Thus, the parameters associated with the ith sample are denoted by #!,. Let #,, be the boot-strap estimate of w. Let C, be the boot-strap estimate of the covariance matrix of w (ie., an estimate of C* in (6)). 

Then, as K> 0, 

==> picture [76 x 39] <==

Correlations among Parameter Estimates 

and 

One important virtue of methods such as balanced analysis of variance (ANOVA) is that the models are constructed so that the factors are orthogonal and thus the correlations among the parameters are zero. A similar issue arises tn multiple linear regression analysis where the problem of multicollinearity is considered of multicollinearity is considered multicollinearity is considered is considered considered (Montgomery & & Peck, 1982). All of the above issues can be reformulated in 1982). All of the above issues can be reformulated in All of the above issues can be reformulated in of the above issues can be reformulated in the above issues can be reformulated in above issues can be reformulated in issues can be reformulated in can be reformulated in be reformulated in reformulated in in a more general setting by considering the following key more general setting by considering the following key general setting by considering the following key setting by considering the following key by considering the following key considering the following key the following key key question: To what extent are the parameters of a probability To what extent are the parameters of a probability what extent are the parameters of a probability extent are the parameters of a probability are the parameters of a probability the parameters of a probability parameters of a probability of a probability probability model correlated? Note that the issue of parameter correla- correlated? Note that the issue of parameter correla- Note that the issue of parameter correla- that the issue of parameter correla- the issue of parameter correla- issue of parameter correla- of parameter correla- parameter correla- correlais relevant for correctly specified as well as misspecified relevant for correctly specified as well as misspecified for correctly specified as well as misspecified correctly specified as well as misspecified specified as well as misspecified as well as misspecified models. 

==> picture [164 x 35] <==

Note that the boot-strap method is also based upon problem of multicollinearity is considered of multicollinearity is considered multicollinearity is considered is considered considered (Montgomery & & asymptotic (large sample) approximations since the Peck, 1982). All of the above issues can be reformulated in 1982). All of the above issues can be reformulated in All of the above issues can be reformulated in of the above issues can be reformulated in the above issues can be reformulated in above issues can be reformulated in issues can be reformulated in can be reformulated in be reformulated in reformulated in in estimated environmental probability distribution only a more general setting by considering the following key more general setting by considering the following key general setting by considering the following key setting by considering the following key by considering the following key considering the following key the following key key approaches the actual environmental probabily distribution question: To what extent are the parameters of a probability To what extent are the parameters of a probability what extent are the parameters of a probability extent are the parameters of a probability are the parameters of a probability the parameters of a probability parameters of a probability of a probability probability as the number of observations, , in the original data set model correlated? Note that the issue of parameter correla- correlated? Note that the issue of parameter correla- Note that the issue of parameter correla- that the issue of parameter correla- the issue of parameter correla- issue of parameter correla- of parameter correla- parameter correla- correlabecomes large. The boot-strap estimates can then be com- _ tion is relevant for correctly specified as well as misspecified relevant for correctly specified as well as misspecified for correctly specified as well as misspecified correctly specified as well as misspecified specified as well as misspecified as well as misspecified pared to the parameter and covariance matrix estimates models. derived by White (1982, 1989, in press) for the original samA model with highly correlated parameters will have two model with highly correlated parameters will have two with highly correlated parameters will have two highly correlated parameters will have two parameters will have two will have two have two two ple of size n. An agreement between the two very different undesirable properties. First, properties. First, First, it is much more difficult to is much more difficult to much more difficult to more difficult to difficult to to asymptotic approximations for estimating the covariance interpret the effects of individual parameters on the modei’s the effects of individual parameters on the modei’s effects of individual parameters on the modei’s of individual parameters on the modei’s individual parameters on the modei’s parameters on the modei’s on the modei’s the modei’s modei’s matrix of the parameter estimates would provide some behavior. Second, highly correlated parameter estimates Second, highly correlated parameter estimates highly correlated parameter estimates correlated parameter estimates parameter estimates estimates reassurance that the sample size, n, is sufficiently large. imply that the “true” Hessian of the error function may be that the “true” Hessian of the error function may be the “true” Hessian of the error function may be Hessian of the error function may be of the error function may be the error function may be error function may be function may be may be be Efron (1982) provides a good review of the boot-strap algoill-conditioned in the vicinity of the parameter estimatesconditioned in the vicinity of the parameter estimates in the vicinity of the parameter estimates the vicinity of the parameter estimates vicinity of the parameter estimates of the parameter estimates the parameter estimates parameter estimates estimates rithm. The fundamental problem with the boot-strap which isa isa violation of one of the key critical assumptions of of one of the key critical assumptions of one of the key critical assumptions of of the key critical assumptions of the key critical assumptions of key critical assumptions of critical assumptions of assumptions of of method is that it is very computationally intensive. White’s (1982, 1989, in press) theory, Vuong’s (1989) press) theory, Vuong’s (1989) theory, Vuong’s (1989) Vuong’s (1989) (1989) 

A model with highly correlated parameters will have two model with highly correlated parameters will have two with highly correlated parameters will have two highly correlated parameters will have two parameters will have two will have two have two two undesirable properties. First, properties. First, First, it is much more difficult to is much more difficult to much more difficult to more difficult to difficult to to interpret the effects of individual parameters on the modei’s the effects of individual parameters on the modei’s effects of individual parameters on the modei’s of individual parameters on the modei’s individual parameters on the modei’s parameters on the modei’s on the modei’s the modei’s modei’s behavior. Second, highly correlated parameter estimates Second, highly correlated parameter estimates highly correlated parameter estimates correlated parameter estimates parameter estimates estimates imply that the “true” Hessian of the error function may be that the “true” Hessian of the error function may be the “true” Hessian of the error function may be Hessian of the error function may be of the error function may be the error function may be error function may be function may be may be be ill-conditioned in the vicinity of the parameter estimatesconditioned in the vicinity of the parameter estimates in the vicinity of the parameter estimates the vicinity of the parameter estimates vicinity of the parameter estimates of the parameter estimates the parameter estimates parameter estimates estimates which isa isa violation of one of the key critical assumptions of of one of the key critical assumptions of one of the key critical assumptions of of the key critical assumptions of the key critical assumptions of key critical assumptions of critical assumptions of assumptions of of White’s (1982, 1989, in press) theory, Vuong’s (1989) press) theory, Vuong’s (1989) theory, Vuong’s (1989) Vuong’s (1989) (1989) 

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 

11 

theory, classical theories based upon using the Fisher inforIf the null hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter the null hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter null hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter is not rejected but the experimenter not rejected but the experimenter rejected but the experimenter but the experimenter the experimenter experimenter mation matrix for estimating the covariance matrix, and _ believes that the source of the problem is due to a choice of Wilk’s (1938) generalized likelihood ratio test. n which was too small, it is possible to estimate the sample which was too small, it is possible to estimate the sample was too small, it is possible to estimate the sample too small, it is possible to estimate the sample small, it is possible to estimate the sample it is possible to estimate the sample is possible to estimate the sample possible to estimate the sample estimate the sample the sample sample 

If the null hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter the null hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter null hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter hypothesis is not rejected but the experimenter is not rejected but the experimenter not rejected but the experimenter rejected but the experimenter but the experimenter the experimenter experimenter and _ believes that the source of the problem is due to a choice of _ believes that the source of the problem is due to a choice of believes that the source of the problem is due to a choice of that the source of the problem is due to a choice of source of the problem is due to a choice of of the problem is due to a choice of the problem is due to a choice of problem is due to a choice of is due to a choice of due to a choice of to a choice of a choice of choice of of n which was too small, it is possible to estimate the sample which was too small, it is possible to estimate the sample was too small, it is possible to estimate the sample too small, it is possible to estimate the sample small, it is possible to estimate the sample it is possible to estimate the sample is possible to estimate the sample possible to estimate the sample estimate the sample the sample sample size, 4’, necessary for a future replication of the original experiment. A W;, is desired so that 

For these reasons, it is useful to examine the correlations among the model parameter estimates. This calculation is easily done by inspection of the asymptotic covariance matrix C,, which is computed using (7). Let #, (i) be the ith element of the strict local minimum, ¥,,, of the sample KLIC loss function such that ,, approaches the strict local minimum, w*, of the true KLIC loss function as # increases. Let é, be the ith element of the asymptotic covariance matrix of the parameter estimates C,,. Then an estimate, ?,,(i, 7), of the correlation between w,,(7) and ,,(7) is given by 

==> picture [207 x 13] <==

at the desired significance level, «, and where r is the rank of the selection matrix S. Using C, and Ww, as estimates of C,and ¥,. respectively, and solving (20) for a’, 

==> picture [73 x 14] <==

==> picture [71 x 31] <==

Between-Groups Hypothesis Testing 

A between-groups comparison is based upon two or more sets of independent measurements. For example, these measurements could be obtained by measuring the performance of one group of subjects at two different points in time. Or alternatively, these measurements could be obtained by measuring the performance of two groups of subjects at the same point in time. That 1s, the terminology “within-groups” and “between-groups” which is used here should not be confused with the terminology “within-subjects” and “between-subjects” since the concept of a “subject factor” is not relevant here (at least not in the usual sense). 

A test of statistal significance of the quantity /,(,7) can be constructed by estimating the asymptotic variance of 7,(i, 7) using boot-strap techniques. 

Within-Groups Hypothesis Testing 

Define a within-groups comparison to be based upon a_ single set of observations (measurements), {xy puny Xp }. If, is the parameter estimate of the unobservable parameter w*, then a Wald test as suggested by White (1982, in press) may be constructed to decide whether to reject the null hypothesis, 

For a between-groups comparison, the asymptotic distribution of the parameter estimates of the first data set is computed using model F,,. Let the estimated mean and the covariance matrix of these parameter estimates be denoted as m1, and é,, respectively. The asymptotic distribution of the parameter estimates of the second data set is then computed using exactly the same probabilistic model Fy,. Let the estimated mean and the covariance matrix of the parameter estimates derived from the second data set be denoted as #, and é3, respectively. Now since the estimates #7, and 1, from the two groups are statistically independent and normally distributed, thetr joint distribution is normally distributed with mean + and covariance matrix ¢ given by the formulas = [71,, it.] and 

==> picture [56 x 23] <==

where S is a constant selection matrix, and 0 is a vector of zeros. Let the rank of the selection matrix S be r. The quantity 

==> picture [200 x 23] <==

where y? is a chi-square random variable with r degrees of freedom, and the notation W, < y> indicates that W, is tributionasymptotically with r distributed degrees of according freedom. to a chi-square dis- 

==> picture [155 x 37] <==

The mechanics of the test are thus straightforward. Compute the statistic W,. Then, if %>2(r), reject the null hypothesis Hy: Sw* = 0. Note that ifw* is not a unique strict global minimum and is merely a strict local minimum, then w* js only locally identifiable. This means, as previously noted in the discussion on model selection statistical tests, that the parameter estimates are substantive only if characteristics of the parameter estimation procedure are taken into account as well. 

where 0 is a d-dimensional submatrix of zeros. A large selection matrix, S, may then be constructed for the betweengroups hypothesis-testing problem in exactly the same manner as such a matrix was constructed for the within-groups case considered in the previous section. Note that these ideas are easily generalized to the case of G independent groups. In this latter case, é will have G submatrices along its main diagonal. 

480/39/1-2 

12 

RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

Multiple Wald Tests on the Same Data Set 

Typicaily a probability ofa the Type experiment-wise Terror), a., significance is chosen to level be 0.05 (1.e., or 0.01 the in the psychology literature. Note that non-independent planned or post-hoc comparisons are known as nonorthogonal contrasts in the analysis-of-variance literature. Multiple Wald tests on the same data set usually have to be treated as multiple non-independent comparisons for nonlinear statistical models. | . If multiple non-independent comparisons using the Wald test need to be made on the same data set, then the experiment-wise probability of a Type I error, «,, must be property controlled. Let «, denote the probability of a Type I error (1.¢., the significance level) associated with a specific statistical test on a data set. Let a, be the probability that for a set of K non-independent comparisons, one or more comparisons resulted in a Type I error. It then follows from the Bonferroni inequality (Manoukian, 1986), p. 4) that 

==> picture [145 x 14] <==

> whereThe BonferroniK is; the number inequality of non-independent suggests; that a conservative statisticala tests. a oe significance level, «,, for each individual test may be chosen 8wn eo Sel LO eee that the experiment-wise

°° 

A PDP MODEL FOR CATEGORICAL TIME SERIES PATH ANALYSIS 

In this section a new PDP model for analyzing data from . rer ae we categorical (nominal) time series is introduced. In addition, itis shown that under certain conditions, which are usually satisfied ; ; ; at estimates ofin thispractice, new modelthe are quasi-maximum unique. Explicit formulaslikelihood for the asymptotic variance of the parameter estimates and methods for model selection using White’s and Vuong’s asymptotic statistical theory are also derived and used. Finally, an empirical comparison between some aspects of White's (1982, 1989, in press) and Vuong’s (1989) asymptotic statistical theories, Efron’s (1982) boot-strap approach, and more classical approaches to estimating the variance of the parameter estimates Is made. 

of dConsider states, a|, complex f>, ... f,, system at each which instant can in enter time. For into example, only one cepts”the states of the system might correspond to a set of d “confrom in a story. A particular subject’s recall of the story of memory would be represented by an ordered sequence these concepts such as 

==> picture [173 x 11] <==

That is, the “trajectory” in (23) would indicate that concept /, was recalled first, then concept f; was recalled, then/, was recalledrecalled. twice, The number then f, of was concepts recalled, recalled and by finally the subject f, was is jn this case equal to six. Thus, the “trajectory length” is equal to six. Note that the trajectory length may be considered to be a random variable as well. Categorical timeseries stochastic processes occur in many areas of cognitive science and experimental psychology. For example, Allison and Liker (1982) have used categorical time-series models to study social interactions between individuals. As another example, hidden Markov models of speech recognition (Levinson er al, 1988) are based upon categorical timeseries stochastic processes. 

A third example of the application of the categorical timeseries analysis approach is described by Golden e7 al. (1993). Golden er al. (1993) used a categorical time-series analysis model described to analyze the temporal structure in story recall data. Furthermore, the proposed categorical time-series analysis mode) was shown to be formally equivalent to a special type or highly constrained parallel distributed processing network. 

theThis basic—_section tgfieticelis maizeddet3 me *followi Aecoricalea tinecsoriee; .¥F analysis 1s proposed and the PDP interpretation of the model is briefly noted. Second, a theorem is stated and proved which provides explicit conditions for guaranteeing the uniqueness of the quasi-maximum likelihood estimates of the model (Appendix 2). Third, explicit formulas for hypothesis testing and model selection relating the asymptotic statistical theory developed in the previous section of this article to the model are derived (Appendix 1). And fourth, simulation results of the proposed PDP model are discussed in order to empirically evaluate the applicability of White’s and Vuong’s asymptotic statistical theories with respect to the proposed PDP model and the data set of Golden er al. (1993) 

a. 

The Probabilistic Model 

It is assumed that each observation or trajectory corresponds to a point in some sample space @. The proposed probability mass model is defined with respect to Q. The form ofthe ith observation, x’, is a d-dimensional by 7'dimensional matrix of the form 

==> picture [123 x 20] <==

> where T’ is a positive integer and x‘(1)= K where K is a constant vector. The fth column of x‘ is a d-dimensional column vector, x(t), which can only take on the values {u, ..., 4g} where u, is a d-dimensional vector with the /th element equal to one indicating that category label / was observed at time ¢. The remaining d— 1 elements of w, are set

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 13 

to zero. Note that although it is assumed that each observation (trajectory) has a definitive starting point, the trajectory length of the ith observation (trajectory) is assumed to be the value, 7’, of a random variable, T. 

observationFor example, the seven-dimensional by four-dimensional] 

==> picture [84 x 27] <==

indicates that observation or data point number three is identified as the categorical time series where category uv, is observed after initial condition K, then category w, Is observed, and finally category u, is observed. The value, 7’, ofnumber the random three has variable, the value of7, associated four. with observation 

Let x'=[x(1)---x(T')] be the ith observation of NV observations. Let y’(1) be a d-dimensional vector of zeros. Define for t=2 tor=T", 

==> picture [198 x 196] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
b, A,
> a S- Ca
<> <“ >
‘> aN
EY ED. 69
O “
ms CAO)
“ o
“ oo
pco(ste)) chats)< rcrhrot*)
X,(t~1) Xo(t-1) Xg(t-1)
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [182 x 11] <==

FIG. 1. PDP model interpretation of the categorical time-series analysis probabilistic model. The activation of the ith input unit, y,(7), ts updated as a weighted sum of its past value and the current input to that unit, x,{7}, using the 4 constant. Connections from the input units to /th ; hidden unit, 4,{7), are constrained such that a smaller number of free parameters, «,,....«, completely specify all connection strengths. In this example with A = 2, the solid connections have strength a, and the dashed connections have strength «,. The pattern of connection from the hidden units to the kth probability unit, g,(¢), is not modifiable and effectively implements a forward lateral inhibition network. 

where @® @¢’x #7—> #* has continuous second partial or derivatives. Define . . . . . ; the d-dimensional by /-dimensional matrix, v'(r), as 

==> picture [118 x 19] <==

where w’ is a d-dimensional matrix of constants which is referred to as a “digraph”grap matrix. Let 

Figure. | shows this. probabilitysq: model is. formally equiv-. alent to a special type of highly constrained connectionist network. For expository reasons, consider a Jordan style - . ; connectionist network (Jordan, 1992) with an exponentially & memory. For networks of memory. For networks of For networks of networks of of this type, the ® function type, the ® function the ® function ® function function yas 

==> picture [154 x 17] <==

where the jth element of A(t) is A(t) and the /th element of Nt)& memory. For networks of memory. For networks of For networks of networks of of this type, the ® function type, the ® function the ® function ® function function 

a is a, Then, for t=2 tot=T7', define 

==> picture [143 x 36] <==

==> picture [286 x 36] <==

==> picture [278 x 2] <==

==> picture [278 x 5] <==

==> picture [17 x 19] <==

==> picture [278 x 1] <==

Finally, let the prior distribution of T be a Poisson distribution of the form 

where y'(1) is a vector of zeroes. 

The ith activation pattern over the input units at timef is QT')=A"ae exp(—Ay/T", (27) specified by y(t) which is updated according to (24) using where T'_is the ith. positivea integer value of random y(tincoming 1). The activation /th matrix, pattern w', x‘(f—1) and can be interpreted memory as corre- buffer variableThen T- 7 __ Sponding to a set of connections from the input to the hidden the probability of trajectory observation x’ is units in Fig. 1 which are constrained so that all connections defined as in that set have some value a,. The activation pattern over the hidden units at time ¢ specified by the vector A'(t). And 7 a(x’ ip | x))=9(T')yl TT "(7 @'(0)1, (28) finally,ey the map p pinging from the hidden unit activation partepattern aes A‘(t) to the activation pattern over the output units, q'(t), specified by (26) can be interpreted as a type of where q'(t) is a d-dimensional vector whose jth element is forward lateral inhibition network of fixed (non-modifiable) q,(t). connections. 

14 RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

Estimation of Model Parameters and Their Asymptotic Variance 

with respect to the data then White’s asymptotic covariance matrix C,, should have roughly the same value as the asymptolic covariance matrices (—4, ‘and B,*) derived from classical asymptotic statistical theory. On the other hand, if —A,° differs from B >", then this signals the presence of model misspecification and it is not correct to use either —A_' or B>' as estimates of the asymptotic covariance matrix of the parameter estimates. Rather, in this latter bines the information case, one should in both use White’s 4-! and formula B>? whichcorrectly com- to yield the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix C,. 

The sample loss function, E,,(a, 2), is derived by substituting (28) into (2) to obtain 

==> picture [172 x 34] <==

where q(x"oy | x'(1)) ts; defined by Eqs. (24)-(28). The quasi-_ masnum likelthood estimates (4, 4) are the critical points of E,,(a, A). Appendix | shows that the critical points (a, 4) are the solutions to the system of equations 

Using a Spare 10 workstation, these parameter estimates and their asymptotic variances were obtained within an hour or two of CPU time. Next, boot-strap estimates of the parameter values and their respective covariance matrices were computed.of CPU time. The This eigenvalues latter calcula of t heion 32-dimensional required several asym- days pototic covariance matrices were compared with the eigenValues of the covariance matrices calculated from boot-strap simulations. Rather than plot the eigenvalues directly, the negative natural logarithm of each eigenvalue was plotted in order to compress the eigenspectrum. 

==> picture [164 x 22] <==

where 

==> picture [5 x 12] <==

==> picture [160 x 23] <==

Appendix 1 also provides an explicit formula for (30) and shows how the asymptotic covariance matrices which are required for White’s (1982, 1989, in press) and Vuong’s (1989) asymptotic statistical theories may be computed. of Finally, the following theorem regarding the uniqueness the parameter estimates is proved in Appendix 2. 

As can be seen in Fig. 2, although the eigenspectrum derived from the boot-strap covariance matrix estimates using 20 samples (dashed line with crosses) differ considerably from the other asymptotic estimates, after 300 samples (open circles) the boot-strap covariance matrix estimates converge to the predictions of White’s asymptotic 

THeoreM 3. Let £,(a, 4) be the Hessian of the sample loss function defined by (38) in Appendix 1. Let (&, A) be a critical point of E,,(a, 2) which is computed using (30) and (31). If the eigenvalues of the Hessian of E,,(a, 2) evaluated at (&, 4) are strictly positive, then (&, A) is the unique quasimaximum likelihood estimate (i.e., strict global minimum of — _ E,,(, A)). > 

==> picture [245 x 203] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
6
.
nn
Se
: aN er
> 4 " OO SARs,
< OH “Weat ay
a ~s SBBBg
nT] ~--¥--  Boot20 -—\ RA x
§ —o— Bo00t300 eee 2
T 2 —o— A SONA
“AS
eB i) BY
—— ¢ ie O05 We
‘
% 3 16 24 32
EIGENVALUE NUMBER
----- End of picture text -----

Empirical Evaluation of the Asymptotic Approximations 

In this section, the adult recall data collected by Golden et al. (1993) is used to empirically evaluate the validity of the proposed asymptotic approximations with respect to (i) a boot strap Monte Carlo method of estimating the variance of the parameter estimates and (ii) classical asymptotic statistical methods for estimating the variance of the parameter estimates. The model Golden et al. (1993) considered was of the form of (28) with a parameter vector of dimension 4 and 24 observations. The covariance . . . ; : matrices for eight different independent data sets (four different texts recalled in an immediate recall and delayed recall condition) were then combined to form a single 32-dimensional covariance matrix as previously discussed. Using the formulas derived in Appendix 1, the asymptotic covariance. matrices. —Anay B,= ,and C,,A were evaluated at the parameter estimates obtained from solving (30) and (31). As previously noted, if the model is correctly specified 

FIG. 2, Comparison of negative; logarithm of the eigenspectrums of alternative asymptotic covariance matrix estimates (see text for additional details), Eigenspectrum estimated from White’s theory (solid circles) is consistent with boot-strap estimates computed from 300 boot-strap samples (open circles). Also note the two eigenspectrums estimated using classical asymptotic statistics (open squares and dashed lines without cles)crosses) but are they not are inconsistent only inconsistent with with each the other boot-strap as well. estimates The eigenspectrum (open cirrepresented by dashed lines with crosses is the boot-strap eigenspectrum computed from only 20 boot-strap samples. 

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 

15 

, 

statistical theory (solid circles). Moreover, the observed difference in Fig. 2 between the negative logarithm of the eigenspectrum of — 4! (open squares) and B,'(dashedlines without crosses) indicates the failure of the Fisher information matrix equality (—A,—8,) and suggests the presence of model misspecification. The presence of model misspecification explains why the asymptotic covariance matrices, —A>' and B-', associated with classical asymptotic statistical theory do not agree as effecively with the boot-strap covariance matrix estimates (see Fig. 2) relative to the predictions of White’s asymptotic statistical theory. These simulation results indicate that, at least for the application considered by Golden et al. (1993), reliable statistical inferences in the presence of model misspecification can be successfully made using White’s statistical theory. These simulation results also indicate that the use of the inverse of the classical Fisher information matrix (1.e., —A~' or Bo ') can lead to wrong statistical inferences in the presence of model misspecification. 

Like the GLRT and classical asymptotic methods for estimating the covariance matrix of the parameter estimates, the theory presented here is only valid for large samples. If the assumed statistical model is correctly specified, then the validity of the large sample assumptions can be evaluated by simulation experiments designed to examine if the model’s “true” parameters (ie, the parameters which actually generated the test data) can actually be recovered by a “typical” sample size. Unfortunately, the assumption of correct specification is not appropriate in many situations. Indeed, one suspects that if many researchers were to bother to check the validity of (1) large sample assumption and (ii) the correctly specified assumption of the GLRT with respect to their applications, it would not be surprising to this author if many applications of the GLRT were not technically appropriate (.e., wrong). This paper has suggested a possible solution to the problem of checking the reliability of large sample statistical inferences by exploiting Efron’s (1982) boot-strap method. The basic idea of this procedure is to use the data as the basis for an asymptotic non-parametric model of the statistical environment and then evaluate parametric asymptotic approximations with respect to the asymptotic approximations with respect to the asymptotic with respect to the asymptotic respect to the asymptotic to the asymptotic the asymptotic asymptotic non-parametric model. model. 

GENERAL DISCUSSION 

The tools and techniques proposed in this article should asymptotic approximations with respect to the asymptotic approximations with respect to the asymptotic with respect to the asymptotic respect to the asymptotic to the asymptotic the asymptotic asymptotic prove useful to researchers for at least four specific reasons. non-parametric model. model. First, such methods can provide principled and disciplined The difficulty of deriving and programming the new difficulty of deriving and programming the new of deriving and programming the new deriving and programming the new and programming the new programming the new the new new guidance to approaching the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the to approaching the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the approaching the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the more work than the work than the than the the work than the than the the than the the the early stages of mathematical model building. Second, such derivation of statistical tests based upon classical methods. of statistical tests based upon classical methods. statistical tests based upon classical methods. tests based upon classical methods. based upon classical methods. upon classical methods. classical methods. methods. methods providea mechanism for making explicit statistical For example, White’s (1982, 1989, in press) method for example, White’s (1982, 1989, in press) method for White’s (1982, 1989, in press) method for (1982, 1989, in press) method for 1989, in press) method for in press) method for press) method for method for for predictions from a probabilistic psychological theory which estimating the asymptotic covariance matrix of the may only be partially correct. Third, Vuong’s (1989) model parameter estimates is essentially a way of combining both estimates is essentially a way of combining both is essentially a way of combining both essentially a way of combining both a way of combining both way of combining both of combining both combining both both selection theory is not limited to comparing nested statisti- _ the first and second derivative information derived from the cal models as in the Wilk’s (1938) generalized likelihood assumed statistical loss function. It is usually not difficult to statistical loss function. It is usually not difficult to loss function. It is usually not difficult to function. It is usually not difficult to It is usually not difficult to is usually not difficult to usually not difficult to not difficult to difficult to to ratio test (also known as the x’ test), but can be used to derive, program, and compute both the first and second program, and compute both the first and second and compute both the first and second compute both the first and second both the first and second the first and second first and second and second second compare models which have equal numbers of parameters. derivatives of the loss function. On the other hand, a little of the loss function. On the other hand, a little the loss function. On the other hand, a little loss function. On the other hand, a little function. On the other hand, a little On the other hand, a little the other hand, a little other hand, a little hand, a little a little little And fourth, such methods provide a mechanism for making more work is required to derive and program the first part is required to derive and program the first part required to derive and program the first part to derive and program the first part derive and program the first part and program the first part program the first part the first part first part part correct statistical inferences from correctly specified models of Vuong’s (1989) theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this Vuong’s (1989) theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this (1989) theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this Nevertheless, one can avoid this one can avoid this avoid this this which might suffer from trivial flaws. portion of the theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- of the theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- the theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- by either (1) making the possibly inap- either (1) making the possibly inap- (1) making the possibly inap- making the possibly inap- the possibly inap- possibly inap- inap- 

The difficulty of deriving and programming the new difficulty of deriving and programming the new of deriving and programming the new deriving and programming the new and programming the new programming the new the new new in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the more work than the work than the than the the work than the than the the than the the the derivation of statistical tests based upon classical methods. of statistical tests based upon classical methods. statistical tests based upon classical methods. tests based upon classical methods. based upon classical methods. upon classical methods. classical methods. methods. For example, White’s (1982, 1989, in press) method for example, White’s (1982, 1989, in press) method for White’s (1982, 1989, in press) method for (1982, 1989, in press) method for 1989, in press) method for in press) method for press) method for method for for estimating the asymptotic covariance matrix of the parameter estimates is essentially a way of combining both estimates is essentially a way of combining both is essentially a way of combining both essentially a way of combining both a way of combining both way of combining both of combining both combining both both statisti- _ the first and second derivative information derived from the _ the first and second derivative information derived from the the first and second derivative information derived from the first and second derivative information derived from the and second derivative information derived from the second derivative information derived from the derivative information derived from the information derived from the derived from the from the the assumed statistical loss function. It is usually not difficult to statistical loss function. It is usually not difficult to loss function. It is usually not difficult to function. It is usually not difficult to It is usually not difficult to is usually not difficult to usually not difficult to not difficult to difficult to to derive, program, and compute both the first and second program, and compute both the first and second and compute both the first and second compute both the first and second both the first and second the first and second first and second and second second derivatives of the loss function. On the other hand, a little of the loss function. On the other hand, a little the loss function. On the other hand, a little loss function. On the other hand, a little function. On the other hand, a little On the other hand, a little the other hand, a little other hand, a little hand, a little a little little more work is required to derive and program the first part is required to derive and program the first part required to derive and program the first part to derive and program the first part derive and program the first part and program the first part program the first part the first part first part part of Vuong’s (1989) theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this Vuong’s (1989) theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this (1989) theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this theory. Nevertheless, one can avoid this Nevertheless, one can avoid this one can avoid this avoid this this portion of the theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- of the theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- the theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- theory by either (1) making the possibly inap- by either (1) making the possibly inap- either (1) making the possibly inap- (1) making the possibly inap- making the possibly inap- the possibly inap- possibly inap- inappropriate assumption that the population variance of the model error difference between the two non-nested models different from zero or (ii) proving that the two models are from zero or (ii) proving that the two models are zero or (ii) proving that the two models are or (ii) proving that the two models are (ii) proving that the two models are proving that the two models are that the two models are the two models are two models are models are are strictly non-nested. The second part of Vuong’s (1989) theory is then computationally trivial: Use the mean and standard error of the model error difference across data samples to decide if the model error difference is 

guidance to approaching the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the to approaching the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the approaching the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the model selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the selection problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the problem in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the in the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the _ statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the statistical tests only requires slightly more work than the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the tests only requires slightly more work than the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the only requires slightly more work than the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the requires slightly more work than the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the slightly more work than the more work than the work than the than the the more work than the work than the than the the work than the than the the than the the the 

Indeed, it is possible some researchers who are currently using GLRT are making wrong statistical inferences because the assumed full model is not an entirely accurate the assumed full model is not an entirely accurate assumed full model is not an entirely accurate full model is not an entirely accurate model is not an entirely accurate is not an entirely accurate not an entirely accurate an entirely accurate entirely accurate accurate _ is different from zero or (ii) proving that the two models are from zero or (ii) proving that the two models are zero or (ii) proving that the two models are or (ii) proving that the two models are (ii) proving that the two models are proving that the two models are that the two models are the two models are two models are models are are representation of the true data generating process. Similarly, it is a common assumption among researchers that the assumed statistical model fits the data well enough that the Fisher information matrix equality is valid. Insituations where the parametric model does not contain the data where the parametric model does not contain the data the parametric model does not contain the data parametric model does not contain the data model does not contain the data does not contain the data not contain the data contain the data the data data _ significantly different from zero. generating process, however, this assumption is not justified. In addition, without this assumption, classical expressions for asymptotic covariance matrices of maximum likelihood estimates result in formulas which are simply incorrect. White (1982, 1989, in press} has provided formulas for asymptotic covariance matrices which are valid even when extreme violations of the Fisher information matrix equality occur (iL.e., when the parametric model is not correct). 

because the assumed full model is not an entirely accurate the assumed full model is not an entirely accurate assumed full model is not an entirely accurate full model is not an entirely accurate model is not an entirely accurate is not an entirely accurate not an entirely accurate an entirely accurate entirely accurate accurate _ is different from zero or (ii) proving that the two models are from zero or (ii) proving that the two models are zero or (ii) proving that the two models are or (ii) proving that the two models are (ii) proving that the two models are proving that the two models are that the two models are the two models are two models are models are are 

tions where the parametric model does not contain the data where the parametric model does not contain the data the parametric model does not contain the data parametric model does not contain the data model does not contain the data does not contain the data not contain the data contain the data the data data _ significantly different from zero. 

Of course the boot-strap calculations are computationally expensive but those calculations are designed to empirically validate the large sample approximations. The computational expense of the boot-strap calculations should not be considered to be a particular problem associated with the theoretical framework described here. Any researcher proposing a new large sample statistical tests should eventually exploit such computer techniques to investigate the validity of the large sample assumptions. 

16 

RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

Indeed, if such computations are computationally prohibitive, the statistical theory described in this article is even more applicable since it generalizes classical large sample methods by making fewer assumptions about the fit of the model to the data generating process. 

Sample Loss Function 

; a 

“ge 

The sample loss function, E,, (0, A) lor the probability model specified by Eqs. (24)-(28) is given by the formula 

Finally, the key analytical calculations associated with White’s (1982, 1989, in press) and Vuong’s (1989) theories were done to illustrate the steps required to apply their methods. To illustrate these techniques, these methods were applied to the model of Golden et al. (1993; also see Golden, in press). This model is misspecified because it is highly constrained by psychologically justifiable constraints determined by modern theories of text knowledge representation. Analysis of the computer simulation results for this particular data set and nonlinear model indicate that (i) classical formulas for the asymptotic covariance matrices provided incorrect estimates (.e., not internally consistent or consistent with the boot-strap estimates), and (ii) White’s (1982, 1989, in press} method provided estimates which were correct (1.¢., consistent with the boot-strap estimates). 

==> picture [175 x 25] <==

where 

==> picture [204 x 23] <==

==> picture [53 x 10] <==

Substituting (28) into (33), 

==> picture [211 x 50] <==

In conclusion, the methods of making correct statistical Parameter Estimates inferences in the presence of model misspecification which The quasi-maximum likelihood estimate is a critical point have been reviewed in this article are important for the 4¢(39) Any critical point of (32) is a parameter vector (4, 4) following reasons. First, it is likely that the asymptotic that satisfies (30) and (31). To see this, note that (30) is approximations of White (1982, 1989, in press) and Vuong simply dE,,(a, A)/da set equal to a vector of A zeros, and / is (1989) will yield more accurate formulas for deriving obtained by setting the derivative of the error function with between-treatment statistical tests and model selection than respect to A equal to zero and solving for 4. By the Uniqueclassical tests. Second, by not requiring models to satisfy a ness Theorem in Appendix 2, if the Hessian of the error goodness-of-fit test, the model builder can focus upon the — function evaluated at a critical point has only positive eigentwo essential issues of model reliability and model validity Values, then the obtained critical point is the unique quasiin a sequential fashion rather than be forced to consider jyaximum likelihood estimate. these issues in parallel as dictated by classical statistical The first derivative of the sample loss function, £,,(a 2), methods. Finally, the general theory of White (1982, 1989, Jip respect to 4 is given by the formula in press) and Vuong (1989) reviewed in this article provides an elegant unified framework for the evaluation and Cn developmentnonlinear models of new of complex phenomena. and appropriate statistical tests for dE.(a, Ada= xi=l dE‘(a, A)/da, 

APPENDIX 1 

where 

The purpose of this section is to provide explicit formulas linking the probability model specified by Eqs. (24)-(28) with White’s and Vuong’s asymptotic statistical theories. 

==> picture [197 x 17] <==

==> picture [4 x 11] <==

Now (31) ts obtained by substituting 4 into the equation 

Notation 

Consider the vector-valued quantity f(x) and the scalarvalued quantity g(x) where /: #4 &% and g: #4 > #74. The quantity df/dx is a matrix whose ijth element is the partial derivative of the ith element off with respect to the /th element of x. The quantity dg/dx is a vector whose ith element is the partial derivative of the ith element of g with respect to x. The quantity d*g/dx? = df/dx where f= dg/dx. 

==> picture [69 x 14] <==

and solving for Z. The first derivative of the sample loss function, £,,(a, 4), with respect to the A-dimensional « vector is given by the formula 

==> picture [136 x 35] <==

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 

17 

where 

==> picture [240 x 30] <==

Asymptotic Covariance Matrices of the Parameter 

Estimates 

Let (& A) be a critical point of the sample loss function defined according, to (30) and (31). Let 2‘ be the column vector 2’ defined by 

==> picture [201 x 23] <==

and evaluated at (&, 4). Let the matrix Z, = [41 47---2"]. 

Then matrix &,, as in (9) is then 

==> picture [55 x 23] <==

Moreover, let E/ be the sample loss function associated with probability model Fy, = {¢/{-; w)}, and E* be the sample loss function associated with probability model Gy= {g,(-;y)}. Let the matrix Z,, associated with model Fy, be indicated by Z, and let the matrix Z, associated with model Gy be indicated by Z,. Then 

==> picture [59 x 14] <==

Let D,, be a diagonal matrix whose jth on-diagonal element is the jth element of vector g‘(r). Let 0, be a A-dimensional column vector of zeros. Then note that d7£,,(a,A)/ di dx =0,, for any (a, A4)e #**!. The Hessian of £,,(a, 2), VE, (a, 4) is then given by the formula 

==> picture [226 x 44] <==

The quantity d?F' (a, 4)/dx? is now computed. Taking the derivative of (36) with respect to a, 

==> picture [7 x 13] <==

==> picture [225 x 21] <==

==> picture [18 x 10] <==

Then note that 

==> picture [208 x 33] <==

Thus, 

==> picture [212 x 46] <==

and 

==> picture [113 x 25] <==

The matrix —A, is computed as in (8) by evaluating —1 timesputed (38) from at (30) the and critical (31). point White’s (& 2) asymptotic covariance where (a, A) is commatrix C,, may then be computed using (7) from 4, and B,,. 

APPENDIX 2 

The purpose of this appendix is to state and prove explicit conditions for the parameter estimates of the proposed PDP model to be unique. To prove this theorem, it is first necessary to prove two lemmas. 

7 

LemMA |. Let A be a real-valued symmetric positive semi-definite d-dimensional matrix. Let X be a matrix, then “#e matrix XAX is positive semi-definite. 

Proof. Since A is a d-dimensional real symmetric positive semi-definite matrix, 

==> picture [63 x 23] <==

where e, is the real-valued column eigenvector associated with the ith non-negative eigenvalue A; of A. The matrix X'AX is positive semi-definite if and only if for any realvalued column vector y, y’(X7AX) y > 0. But 

==> picture [202 x 67] <==

LEMMA 2. Let M be a d-dimensional diagonal square matrix whose ith on-diagonal element, m,; is given by 

==> picture [51 x 12] <==

and whose ijth off-diagonal element, m,,, is given by 

==> picture [53 x 9] <==

where 0 < p;<1 and ¥4_,p;=1. Then M is positive semidefinite. 

18 

RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

Proof. By Gershgorin’s circle theorem (Noble and Daniel, 1977, p. 289) every eigenvalue 4 of M must satisfy at least one of the mequalities: 

and partial derivatives and is positive semi-definite for all at (a, 4)e@"+'!, then E,(a,2) is convex on #'+! (Luenberger, 1984, p. 180). Moreover, since E,, (a, 4) is convex on g"*", any strict local minimum of E,,(a, A) is the unique (41) _ Strict global minimum (Luenberger, 1984, p.181). Q.E.D. 

==> picture [83 x 23] <==

Introducing the assumed constraints on m,, and m,, (41) becomes 

APPENDIX 3 

The purpose of this appendix is to review the basic steps of the variance test described by Vuong (1989). Let AY be the Hessian matrix associated with model Fy as in (8). Let B/ be the matrix associated with model Fas in (9). Let A® be the Hessian matrix associated with model Gy as in (8). Let B® be the matrix associated with model Gy as in (9). Also define a new matrix, B@, so that 

==> picture [188 x 36] <==

Thus, (41) subject to the constraints on M becomes 

==> picture [199 x 15] <==

which simplifies to 

==> picture [81 x 15] <==

==> picture [241 x 39] <==

Thus, all eigenvalues of Mf are greater than or equal to zero. 

where the notation V, log[q,(x;;9,)] indicates that the gradient of log[.¢,(x;; ¥)] with respect to y should be computed and then evaluated at the point y,- Then R, is defined as follows 

==> picture [30 x 16] <==

THEOREM 3. Let E,(a, 2) be the Hessian of the sample loss function defined by (38) in Appendix 1. Let (&, 4) be a critical point of E,,{a, A) which is computed using (30) and (31). If the eigenvalues of the Hessian of £,,(a, 2) evaluated at (8, 4) are strictly positive, then (é, A) is the unique quasimaximum likelihood estimate (i.e., strict global minimum of E,(a, 2). 

==> picture [207 x 36] <==

The first stage of Vuong’s (1989) model selection proce- 

Proof. First note that 

dure may now be reviewed. As previously noted, Vuong (1989) makes a number of regularity assumptions which are similar to the regularity assumptions associated with White’s asymptotic statistical theory (see Vuong, 1989, for additional details). Given these assumptions, Vuong (1989) shows that as n increases, 62, a7 with probability one. Vuong (1989, Lemma 4.1) also showed that the null hypothesis that F,, and Gy are nor strictly non-nested (ie., Hy: 4-3 w*)=q,(-; y* )) is formally equivalent to the null hypothesis that > =0. Vuong (1989) then showed that the variance statistic 67, has a weighted chi-square distribution (see Appendix 4 for details regarding this distribution; also Vuong,statistical 1989). test Thus, based Vuong upon the (1989) variance was able statistic, to construct é2,, in a order to decide if two probability models Fy and Gy are 

==> picture [129 x 12] <==

for any (a, A)e R’+'. Thus, a? £(a, A)/dd” is non-negative. Second, it now is shown that d?E% (a, 2)/dx? is positive semi-definite for any (a, 4)¢2**'. By Proposition 2, the matrix D,,;— q(t) q'(t) is positive semi-definite. And this observation in conjuction with Proposition 1 shows that 

==> picture [209 x 48] <==

is positive semi-definite for any (a,2)¢@"*'. Thus, _ strictly non-nested. d° E"(a, A)/dx? is positive semi-definite for any (a, A)e #*** since the sum of a finite number of positive semidefinite matrices is a positive semi-definite matrix. 

Thus, _ strictly non-nested. 

This variance test consists of the following three step procedure. First, compute quasi-maximum likelihood estimates y, and #,, for each of the two probability models Gy and Fy. Second, let &? be a vector whose ith element is the square of the ith eigenvalue of R,. Using the algorithm in Appendix 4, compute the critical value o2(@?) which has the property that a weighted chi-square random variable 

Inspection of V7£,,(a, 2) in (38) Appendix 1 in conjunction with the above two results show that for any (a, 2)€ R**' VE,(a, A) in (38) is positive semi-definite for any (a,i)eR"+'. Since E,,(a, 4) has continuous second 

MAKING CORRECT STATISTICAL INFERENCES 

19 

with parameter vector «7 will exceed ¢2(@7). And third, decide the models G, and Fy, are strictly non-nested (iec., reject Hy: D=0) ifnd?, > o2(o’). 

The integral in (46) is then numerically evaluated by making the substitution of variables 

==> picture [73 x 14] <==

APPENDIX 4 

where T is the “sampling rate period” and N is the number of sampling points. The integral in (46) then becomes 

The purpose of this Appendix is to define a cumulative weighted chi-square distribution following Vuong (1989) and suggest a numerically efficient way to calculate this distribution. The proposed method for calculating this distribution was suggested by Stuart Golden (personal a communication, December 1992). 

==> picture [246 x 25] <==

==> picture [17 x 11] <==

DeFINITION 4. Let Z=[Z,,..,Z,,] be a vector of m independent and identically distributed Gaussian random variables with mean zero and variance one. Then the random variable U,,=27_,k;Z; has a weighted chisquare distribution with weighting parameter vector K = [Ais es Kin J 

The motivation for this substitution of variables is based upon the idea that the integrand of (46) is modelled as a complex periodic function whose period just happens to be equal to NT. 

The integral in (47) is then approximated as a sum to obtain 

The probability density function of y,;=Z? where Z, is a Gaussian random variable with mean zero and variance one random variable with mean zero and variance one variable with mean zero and variance one with mean zero and variance one mean zero and variance one zero and variance one and variance one variance one one = F( U,,) = (1/NT) is called a chi-square density function with one degree of freedom. Let j be the square root of negative one. The characteristic function of y; is defined as the expectation of exp( jty,;) with respect to the probability distribution of y;. Wilks (1962, p. 183) notes that the characteristic function of the chi-square random variable y; = Z7 is given by 

==> picture [181 x 47] <==

Gaussian random variable with mean zero and variance one random variable with mean zero and variance one variable with mean zero and variance one with mean zero and variance one mean zero and variance one zero and variance one and variance one variance one one = F( U,,) = (1/NT) 

where ¢, = 2x/(TN). 

By choosing K to be a vector of d ones, F(U,,) reduces to the familiar chi-square cumulative distribution function associated with a chi-square random variable with d degrees of freedom. Using N = 50,0000 and T = 0.0001, an informal comparison between this proposed numerical! algorithm and published chi-square tables showed a relative error of approximately 1%. If desired, the accuracy of this algorithm could be improved by evaluating (46) using more sophisticated numerical integration methods. The essential trick is the expression of the cumulative distribution function F(Y,,) as the single integral in (46), 

==> picture [171 x 11] <==

The characteristic function of 

==> picture [56 x 34] <==

is now computed using a theorem discussed by Wilks (1962, p. 121). In particular, 

REFERENCES 

==> picture [171 x 28] <==

Allison, P. D., & Liker, J. K. (1982). Analyzing sequential categorical data on dyadic interaction: A comment on Gottman. Psychological Bulletin, 91, 393-403. 

where ®,(t) is the characteristic function of y, since V5 5 ¥m ate independent random varibles, Given the characteristic function of U... it is now desired to : . mo compute the cumulative distribution function, FUU,,), of U,,. Making use of the fact that U,, is always non-negative and the “inversion formula” provided by Manoukian (1986, p. 12), we have 

Bentler, P. M. (1980). Multivariate analysis with latent variables: Causal modeling. Annual Review of Psychology, 34, 419-456.

Efron, B. (1982). The jacicknife, the bootstrap and other resampling plans, Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

Falmagne, J.. Koppen, M., Villano, M., Doigonon, J., & Johannsen, L. (1990}. Introduction 10 knowledge spaces: How to build, test, and search them. Psychological Review, 97, 201-224.

Golden, R. M. (1988a}, Probabilistic characterization of neutral model computations. In D. Z. Anderson (Ed.), Neural networks and information processing (pp. 310-316), New York: American Institute of Physics. Golden,ing approaches. R. M. (1988b), Relating neural In The proceedings networks of the artificial to traditional intelligence engineer- and advanced computer technology conference. Glen Ellyn, IL: Tower Conference Management Company. 

==> picture [238 x 40] <==

20 RICHARD M. GOLDEN 

Golden, R. M, (1988c). A unified framework for connectionist systems. Biological Cybernetics, 59, 109-120. Golden, R. M. (in press). Analysis of categorical time-series text recall data using a connectionist model. Journal of Biological Systems. Golden, R. M., Golden, S. F., Strickland, J., & Choi, 1. (1983). A psychometric pdp model of temporal structure in story recall. In The proceedings of the fourteenth annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 487-491). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

   Montgomery, D. C., & Peck, E. A. (1982). ftroduction to linear regression analysis. New York: Wiley.

   Noble, B., & Daniel, J. W. (1977). Applied linear algebra. Englewood Cliffs,

   NJ: Prentice-Hall.

   Riefer, D. M., & Batchelder, W. H. (1988). Multinomial modeling and the measurement of cognitive processes. Psychological Review, 95, 318-339.

   Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning inter-

Huber, P. (1967). The behavior of maximum likelihood estimates under nal representations by error propagation. In D. E. Rumelhart & J. L. nonstandard conditions. In Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing (Vol. 1: Foundations, in’ mathematical statistics and probability. Berkeley: University of pp. 318-362). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. California Press. Trees, H. L. V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New H. L. V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New L. V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New estimation, and medulation theory, New and medulation theory, New medulation theory, New theory, New New

   Trees, H. L. V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New H. L. V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New L. V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New V. (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New (1968). Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New Detection, estimation, and medulation theory, New estimation, and medulation theory, New and medulation theory, New medulation theory, New theory, New New

Jordan, M. IJ. (1992). Constrained supervised learning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 36, 396-425.

York: Wiley. Vuong, Q. H. (1989). Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and nonnested hypotheses. Econometrica, 57, 307-333. 

Kulliback, S., & Leibler, R. A, (1951). On information and sufficiency. Annals of of Mathematical Statistics, 22, 79-86. Statistics, 22, 79-86. 22, 79-86. 79-86.

Annals of of Mathematical Statistics, 22, 79-86. Statistics, 22, 79-86. 22, 79-86. 79-86. White, H. (1982). Maximum likelihood estimation of misspecified models. Levinson, S. E., Ljolje, A.. & Miller, L. G. {1988). Large vocabulary speech Econometrica, 50, 1-25. recognition using a hidden markov model for acoustic/phonetic White, H. (1989). Learning in artificial neutral networks: A statistical classification. In 1988 [EEE International conference on acoustics, perspective. Neural Computation, 1, 425-464. speech, and signal precessing (Vol. 1, pp. 505-508). Piscataway, NJ: | White, H. {in press). Estimation, inference, and specification analysis. New IEEE Service Center. York: Cambridge Univ. Press. Lord, F. M. (1980). Applications of item response theory to practical testing Wilks, S. S. (1938). The large sample distribution of the likelihood ratio for problems. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. testing composite hypotheses. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 9, Luenberger, D. G. (1984). Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, G. (1984). Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, (1984). Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, and nonlinear programming. Reading, nonlinear programming. Reading, programming. Reading, Reading, 60-62. 

Luenberger, D. G. (1984). Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, G. (1984). Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, (1984). Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, Linear and nonlinear programming. Reading, and nonlinear programming. Reading, nonlinear programming. Reading, programming. Reading, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Manoukian, E. B. (1986). Modern concepts and theorems of mathematical statistics, New York: Springer-Verlag. 

Wilks, S. 8. (1962}. Mathematical statistics. New York: Wiley.

Received: January 31, 1992 

