10.1016/j.jmp.2004.01.003
In an immediate ordered recall task, a list of items is presented, and the participant immediately attempts to recall the items in order. Two common indices of performance are the probabilities of correctly recalling the individual items and the probability of correctly recalling the entire list. For establishing effects of experimental manipulations, these indices are treated as more or less equivalent, although investigators realize they are not measures of exactly the same thing. The differences between what they measure are not well understood.

Recall of an entire list plays an important role in the study of immediate recall. One reason is the definition of memory span as the length of a list that can be correctly recalled in order half the time. However, there has been little theoretical work on predicting recall of an entire list. Most general theories of memory have not addressed it, probably because the topic is specific to the situation where such recall is possible, namely short lists recalled without delay. A prominent exception is the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , discussed below.

A simple hypothesis is that recall of individual items is independent, so correct recall of an entire list is the product of the probabilities that each individual item is correctly recalled. This hypothesis was rejected by  Murdock (1968) . In his Experiment VI on immediate ordered recall, the probability of correctly recalling item  i  in its position was higher if item  i −1 was correctly recalled in its position than if not. (It is worth noting that at the last serial position, these two conditional probabilities differed by only a little.)

Given the violation of independence in the experiment of  Murdock (1968) , it is not surprising that in an experiment by  Schweickert, Chen, and Poirier (1999)  the probability of recalling an entire list was greater than the product of the probabilities of recalling the individual items. The probability of correct recall of an entire list depends somehow on the way recall of one item depends on recall of other items.

Potentially, there are many dependencies to consider. These include recall of an item via associations with adjacent items, remote items, compounds of items, hierarchical groups of items, and associations with context, where context includes the serial positions of items (see, e.g.,  Kahana, 1996 ). This long list of potentially relevant dependencies may be another reason there has been little attempt to predict recall of an entire list. Here we consider taking into account dependencies between adjacent items, or dependencies between items and higher level units such as chunks and categories.

A simple form of dependency is suggested by the chaining hypothesis ( Ebbinghaus, 1984 /1885;  Wickelgren, 1965 ). In its simplest form, the chaining hypothesis states that there are only associations between adjacent items in a list, and once an item is recalled, it leads by association to recall of the next item. The cumulative effect of many studies indicates that the simple chaining hypothesis is wrong (see, e.g.,  Primoff, 1938 ;  Young, 1968 ). Nonetheless, it is known that dependencies between adjacent items are important.

For example, for ordered recall, an influential model, TODAM, accounts for many phenomena using a modified form of chaining ( Lewandowsky & Murdock, 1989 ;  Murdock, 1982, 1995 ). In free recall,  Kahana (1996)  found that items in adjacent input positions tend to be recalled together, and in the order presented.  Laming (1999)  found that in free recall, nearly a third of recalls could be classified as recall of item  i  followed by recall of item  i +1.

If dependencies between adjacent items are all that matter, then relations between items could be accounted for completely by the conditional probability of correctly recalling the item in position  i , given correct recall of the item in position  i −1. Then the following formula, from  Schweickert et al. (1999) , should predict recall of an entire list well, because it uses only dependencies between adjacent list items, 
                         
                            (1) 
                            P(〈1,2,…,n〉)=P(1)P(2|1)P(3|2)⋯P(n|n−1). 
                         
                      The quantity on the left-hand side is the probability all  n  items in the list are recalled correctly in their correct positions. On the right-hand side,  P (1) is the probability the first item is recalled correctly in the first position;  P (2|1) is the conditional probability the second item is recalled correctly in the second position, given the first item is recalled correctly in the first position, and so on. (Throughout this paper, correct recall of an item means correct recall in the correct position.)

The formula does not explicitly allow for the backward dependencies  Kahana (1996)  found to be important (see also  Kahana, 2002 ;  Rizzuto & Kahana, 2001 ). However, an alternative expression, conditioning on succeeding items rather than preceding items, 
                         
                            P(1|2)P(2|3)⋯P(n−1|n)P(n), 
                         
                      can easily be shown to be equivalent. In other words, the formula is neutral with respect to whether adjacent dependencies are forward or backward.

In an experiment on immediate typed recall of visually presented digits,  Schweickert et al. (1999)  found that the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula above predicted recall of entire lists well. The lists presented had 8, 9 or 10 digits. For some participants, items were presented sequentially, followed immediately by recall. For other participants, items were presented simultaneously, followed by a single typed rehearsal, followed immediately by recall. Two participants were assigned to each list length and presentation mode. Probability of correct recall of the entire list ranged from 0.01 to 0.89.

The results were both favorable and unfavorable for the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula. On the one hand, for all 12 participants the estimate of the left-hand side of  Eq. (1)  exceeded the estimate of the right. Hence, the hypothesis that the formula is exactly correct can be rejected by a sign test at the 0.001 level. On the other hand, the mean error in prediction was only 0.06, ranging from 0.01 to 0.11. Empirically, the formula gives a lower bound on the probability of recalling an entire list, and is close enough to serve as a useful approximation in some situations.

It is surprising that the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula does well, because it uses very little information about the relationships between items. The fact that it works well supports the simple chaining hypothesis as an approximation, of course. But it is important to keep in mind that the simple chaining hypothesis was rejected as being exactly correct, and other hypotheses can lead to  Eq. (1)  as well.

Our purpose here is to further evaluate the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula. How does one evaluate an approximation, after conceding at the outset that it is wrong? In the long run, an approximation is judged on how useful it turns out to be. For now, our evaluation has three parts. (a) We will test whether an alternative form of dependency, through retrieval of higher level units, is correct. The form of dependency we consider generalizes a formula used by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . (b) We will show in two experiments that the approximation remains good when participants group (chunk) the items. (c) Because the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  predicts recall of an entire list, we will compare its prediction error with that of the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula.

When the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula ( Eq. (1) ) was fit to data ( Schweickert et al., 1999 ), the error was systematic. For each of the 12 participants, the probability of correctly recalling the entire list was slightly larger than that predicted by  Eq. (1) . Further, errors tended to be larger for simultaneous presentation with rehearsal than for sequential presentation without rehearsal, when dependencies are harder to develop. Clearly, something additional in the dependencies between items remains to be accounted for.

A discrepancy would be predicted by critics of the chaining hypothesis, such as  Henson, Norris, Page, and Baddeley (1996)  and  Mewhort, Popham, and James (1994) . The question is whether one can account for the additional dependencies without introducing a combinatorial explosion by considering, e.g., all possible relations between items. Alternatives to simple chaining include compound chaining models ( Ebbinghaus, 1984 /1885;  Slamecka, 1985 ), which assume remote associations as well as adjacent associations, and models postulating dependencies via higher level units such as chunks ( Johnson, 1970 ;  Anderson & Matessa, 1997 ). Remote associations are clearly effective, but idiosyncratic and beyond the scope of this paper. We turn to dependencies via higher level units.

An appealing way of expressing dependencies on higher level units is suggested by a key formula in the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . The formula is explicitly for chunks, but it readily applies to other higher level units. The theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  as a whole is rather complicated, but the formula is simple. It avoids the oversimplification of considering only adjacent items and the complexity of considering all possible subsets of items, by assuming that all relevant dependencies are based on chunks. (We will follow their terminology and call chunks groups).

According to  Anderson and Matessa (1997, p. 736)  the probability of retrieving all the items in a list is the product of the probability of retrieving each group, times the probability of retrieving each item in each group given the group is retrieved. Because there is no observable event corresponding to retrieval of an item, the formula as stated cannot be applied. But the version of the theory  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  used in their Excel program for fitting their data treats retrieval of an item as recall of the item, and we do the same.

Until now, the item presented in serial position  i  was called item  i , or simply  i . This notation is not adequate for representing items in groups, so additional notation is needed. Suppose the items in a list are in groups  G 
                         1 , G 
                         2 ,…, G 
                         
                            g 
                         . The items in group 1 are  I 
                         1,1 , I 
                         2,1 ,…, I 
                         
                            n 1,1 , and so on. We sometimes use  G  to indicate that group  G  was retrieved (in its proper position) and  I  to indicate that item  I  was recalled (in its proper position); the meaning is clear from context.

In the  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  theory, then, the probability of correctly recalling the entire list with each item in its proper position is the product of the probabilities of retrieving each group (in its proper position) times the probability of recalling each item (in its proper position), given its group was retrieved (in its proper position). That is, 
                            
                               (2) 
                               P(〈1,2,…,n〉)=P(G 1 )P(I 1,1 |G 1 )⋯P(I n1,1 |G 1 )⋯P(G g )P(I 1,g |G g )⋯P(I ng,g |G g ), 
                            
                         where  G  denotes the event that group  G  is retrieved (in its proper position), and  I | G  denotes the event that item  I  is recalled (in its proper position), given group  G  is retrieved (in its proper position). Note that to use the formula, the grouping must be known. On its own, the formula cannot be used to predict recall of an entire list, because it contains expressions for the probabilities of the unobservable events that each group was retrieved. However, it is a useful theoretical statement, and a reasonable extension of it can be tested empirically.

Let the item in position  j  of group  u  be denoted  I u, j 
                         , and so on. Let  〈I 1,1 …I u, j …I v,k …I n g ,g 〉  denote the event that all the items in the list were recalled correctly, let  〈I 1,1 …I u, j ′…I v,k …I n g ,g 〉  denote the event that all items in the list were recalled in their correct positions, except for item  I u, j, 
                          and so on.

Suppose the probability of recalling the entire list is given by  Eq. (2) , used by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . We make two further assumptions. First, when all the groups are retrieved, we suppose failures to recall one or two items are governed by equations analogous to  Eq. (2) . So, for example, 
                            
                               P(〈I 1,1 ,I 2,1 ′,I 3,1 ,…,I n g ,g 〉)= P(G 1 )P(I 1,1 |G 1 )P(I 2,1 ′|G 1 )P(I 3,1 |G 1 )⋯P(G g )⋯P(I n g ,g |G g ), 
                            
                         and so on. This formula expresses a form of conditional independence; given that all the groups are retrieved, the items are recalled independently.

The premise of the first assumption is that all the groups are retrieved. This is not an observable event, so we need a second assumption about conditions sufficient for this premise to be satisfied. We make two slightly different assumptions, depending on whether the two items of an arbitrarily chosen pair are in the same group or not. (a) Suppose each item in a pair is in a different group. We assume that if all items in a group were recalled in their proper positions, or all but one, then the group was retrieved. (b) Suppose both items in a pair are from the same group, and the group has more than two items. We assume that if all items in the group were recalled in their proper positions, or all but one or two, then the group was retrieved. We do not require these assumptions to be necessary for a group to be retrieved, only that they be sufficient. (We do not consider the case of a pair of items from a group of size two, because if neither is recalled, there is no information about whether the group was retrieved or not. In the data analyzed here, we know the group sizes, and we do not use data for pairs of items coming from groups of two.)

From these two assumptions and  Eq. (2) , for any pair of items,  I u, j 
                          and  I 
                         
                            v , k 
                         , 
                            
                               
                                  
                                     P(I 1,1 …I u, j …I v,k …I n g ,g ) 
                                     P(I 1,1 …I u, j …I v,k ′…I n g ,g ) 
                                  = 
                                  
                                     P(G 1 )P(I 1,1 |G 1 )⋯P(G k )P(I v,k |G k )⋯P(G g )P(I n g ,g |G g ) 
                                     P(G 1 )P(I 1,1 |G 1 )⋯P(G k )P(I v,k ′|G k )⋯P(G g )P(I n g ,g |G g ) 
                                  = 
                                  
                                     P(I v,k |G k ) 
                                     P(I v,k ′|G k ) 
                                  = 
                                  
                                     P(I 1,1 …I u, j ′…I v,k …I n g ,g ) 
                                     P(I 1,1 …I u, j ′…I v,k ′…I n g ,g ) 
                                  . 
                            
                         It follows that 
                            
                               (3) 
                               P(I 1,1 …I u, j …I v,k …I n g ,g )P(I 1,1 …I u, j ′…I v,k ′…I n g ,g )= P(I 1,1 …I u, j …I v,k ′…I n g ,g )P(I 1,1 …I u, j ′…I v,k …I n g ,g ).

For the cross product  Eq. (3)  to be derived, the higher level units need not be groups (i.e., chunks). Let  E 
                            1 , E 
                            2 ,…, E 
                            
                               m 
                             be events. Suppose the items in the list can be partitioned so that for each event  E 
                            
                               j 
                             there is an associated set of items  {I 1, j ,…,I nj, j } , and the following three statements are true:

(i) The probability all items in the list are correctly recalled in their correct positions is 
                               
                                  (4) 
                                  P(〈I 1,1 ,…I u, j …I v,k …I nm,m 〉)= P(〈I 1,1 ,…I u, j …I v,k …I nm,m 〉&E 1 &E 2 &⋯&E m )= P(I 1,1 |E 1 )⋯P(I n1,1 |E 1 )⋯P(I u, j |E j )⋯P(I v,k |E k )⋯P(I 1,m |E m )P(I nm,m |E m )P(E 1 &E 2 &⋯&E m ).

(ii) The probability all items in the list are correctly recalled in their correct positions, except for a particular item  I u, j 
                             is 
                               
                                  (5) 
                                  P(〈I 1,1 ,…I u, j ′…I v,k …I nm,m 〉)= P(〈I 1,1 ,…I u, j ′…I v,k …I nm,m 〉&E 1 &E 2 &⋯&E m )= P(I 1,1 |E 1 )⋯P(I n1,1 |E 1 )⋯P(I u, j ′|E j )⋯P(I v,k |E k )⋯P(I 1,m |E m )⋯P(I nm,m |E m )P(E 1 &E 2 &⋯&E m ).

(iii) The probability all items in the list are correctly recalled in their correct positions, except for two particular items  I u, j 
                             and  I 
                            
                               v , k 
                             is 
                               
                                  (6) 
                                  P(〈I 1,1 ,…I u, j ′…I v,k ′…I nm,m 〉)= P(〈I 1,1 ,…I u, j ′…I v,k ′…I nm,m 〉&E 1 &E 2 &⋯&E m )= P(I 1,1 |E 1 )⋯P(I n1,1 |E 1 )⋯P(I u, j ′|E j )⋯P(I v,k ′|E k )⋯P(I 1,m |E m ⋯P(I nm,m |E m )P(E 1 &E 2 &⋯&E m ). 
                               
                            Then  Eq. (3)  follows. Note that Assumptions (i)–(iii) say nothing about what happens if events  E 
                            1 ,…, E 
                            
                               m 
                             do not occur.

Assumptions (i)–(iii) are forms of conditional independence. To give a simple example, conditional independence occurs for two random variables  X  and  Y  if there exists a random variable  C  such that for all possible values  x  and  y  of  X  and  Y , and for every possible value  c  of  C ,  P(X=x & Y=y|C=c)=P(X=x|C=c)P(Y=y|C=c) . See, e.g.,  Dzhafarov (2003)  for more information.

The following are examples of situations with events  E 
                            1 ,…, E 
                            
                               m 
                             of the sort referred to in assumptions (i)–(iii). In a multiple list paradigm, a participant is presented with several lists, one after the other. After a delay, he is asked to recall a particular list, say, list 3. According to  Nairne (1990) , in this situation the first step is to retrieve the representation of the particular list (which may be difficult if the lists are not distinct). After the representation of the list is retrieved, the participant attempts recall of the individual items. It is quite unlikely that all but one or two of the items in the list would be recalled unless the representation of the list was retrieved. That is, if  R  is the event that all the items except possibly one or two were recalled, and  E  is the event that the representation of the list was retrieved, then it is reasonable to assume  P(R&E)=P(R) . If, further, the items are recalled independently, given that the list is retrieved, then assumptions (i)–(iii) would hold.

As a second example, consider a to-be-recalled list such as ROSE, ZINK, IRON, DAISY, TIN, ORCHID, constructed of items from different categories. It is reasonable to assume that if all the items except possibly one or two are recalled in their correct positions, then all the categories were retrieved. If the items in a category are recalled independently, given that the category is retrieved, then assumptions (i)–(iii) would hold.

Johnson (1970)  found that the hierarchical group structure of a list influences the Transitional Error Probability (TEP), that is, the probability of failing to recall item  i  given correct recall of item  i −1. Moving from position to position, he observed a large increase in the TEP when item  i  was in a different group from item  i −1. In our notation, this corresponds to a large decrease in  P ( i | i −1) when  i  and  i −1 are in different chunks. (The TEP at position  i  is simply 1 minus  P ( i | i −1)). For explanations of grouping, see  Frick (1989) .

Because when moving from position to position a group boundary is expected to produce a drop in the conditional probability,  P ( i | i −1), it seems that grouping could lead to a failure of the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula as an approximation to the probability of recall of an entire list. As a compensating factor, the groups themselves are made of adjacent items, and the dependencies of items within groups would be expected to be larger than if there were no groups. Whether the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula would be a good approximation when there is grouping is an empirical question, one of the motivations for Experiment 1.

The thrust of this paper is to evaluate product formulas for recall of an entire list. Because one of the formulas was inspired by a formula in the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , it is natural to evaluate the prediction of that theory in its entirety. That theory is relatively complex, so a comparison of it with the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula is a comparison of apples and oranges. Nonetheless, the theory provides a benchmark; to our knowledge it provides the best available theoretical prediction for recall of an entire list.

We give here a brief description of the components used by the theory for predicting recall of an entire list. The equations used are in  Appendix A . It is not feasible to give a complete summary here. For a full treatment, the reader is referred to  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  and its accompanying Excel program; both are needed for the details.

The theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  predicts latency and error patterns in serial recall, addressing effects of serial position, list length, delay, word length, positional confusion, acoustic confusion, and articulatory suppression. In particular, the theory predicts the probability of recall of an entire list from quantities such as the time since each item was encoded.

The theory is developed from the Adaptive Character of Thought-Rational (ACT-R) production system ( Anderson, 1990 ). ACT-R divides knowledge into two kinds. Declarative knowledge is represented in a knowledge structure, such as a hierarchy of groups or other knowledge units. Procedural knowledge is represented by production rules that coordinate the retrieval of the declarative information.

In the theory, a list is represented as a sequence of groups, say 〈 G 
                         1 , G 
                         2 , G 
                         3 〉, and a group is a sequence of items, say 〈 I 
                         11 , I 
                         21 , I 
                         31 〉. For example, a list of 9 digits can be grouped as three groups with three digits in each group, 984 365 201. Each knowledge unit, group or item, represents the identity of the element and also its position in the hierarchical structure. Production rules use this positional information to organize the serial recall of a list of items.

The recall scheme is like a depth-first tree-searching algorithm, through the hierarchical structure. The participant recalls a list in order by attempting to retrieve the highest level knowledge unit, and a goal is set to retrieve the next knowledge unit. A knowledge unit  i  is successfully retrieved with probability  prob 
                         
                            i 
                          (see  Appendix A ). Whether it is successfully retrieved or not, an attempt is made to retrieve the next knowledge unit. When the procedure retrieves a knowledge unit representing an item, it recalls the item; when it reaches a knowledge unit representing subunits that are not items, it moves down to the first knowledge unit below. (See also  Johnson, 1970 ;  Reitman & Rueter, 1980 ). Through the way the recall procedure is organized, when the first  k  items have been successfully recalled, an attempt to recall the item in position  k +1 is made when the proper position is reached.

Each step has a certain probability of failure. Memory access is contingent upon a limited-capacity activation process, these limitations lead in a number of ways to the limitations of serial memory. For example, as list length increases, activation must be divided among more elements; moreover, recall time increases so activation decays more, and there are more opportunities for positional and acoustic confusions. Although complexity arises from the large number of mechanisms, the basic equations are straightforward and are given in  Appendix A .

It is not possible to fit the model of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  to the data of the experiment by  Schweickert et al. (1999) , because grouping was not encouraged and timing data were not available. To consider grouping and the model of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , two new experiments were conducted.

In Experiment 1, we follow the procedure of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . Because our results do not clearly indicate that participants grouped the items, a second experiment was conducted using colored digits to induce grouping. For both experiments, we evaluated (a) the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula in  Eq. (1) ; (b) the cross-product formula in  Eq. (3) , as a means of evaluating the Product of Group Conditionals formula of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) ,  Eq. (2) ; and (c) the prediction of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  based on timing.

The procedure follows closely that reported by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , including presentation of items in groups. Lists were shown to participants, who recalled by typing.  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  used lists made of digits selected without replacement, and we did also. Such lists are a standard material in immediate recall, and easy for participants to type. A drawback is that with only 10 digits the correct guessing rate may be high, but incalculable because the participant's memory for digits recalled earlier during the recall of a list is not well understood. There were visual spaces between groups when the list was presented and recalled, to induce the participants to group. On each trial, we recorded the accuracy of ordered recall of the entire list, accuracy of recall of each item in its position, and the time at which the participant typed in each digit.

Eight introductory Psychology students participated for course credit. Each participant attended three 1-hour sessions, each on a different day.

Digits were white, presented on a dark screen with a distance of about  1.27 
                            cm 
                          between group elements and about  2.4 
                            cm 
                          between groups. Each digit was about  0.28 
                            cm 
                          wide. The computer monitor had 25 rows and 80 columns under DOS display. Digits started at row 12 and column 4. Participants sat about  58 
                            cm 
                          in front of the monitor, so the horizontal visual angle of a list was about 10°, depending on the individual participants’ locations and list lengths.

Stimulus lists were formed by sampling digits from {0,…,9}. No two digits were the same in a list for a trial. Between trials no two lists were the same, considering order and contents.

Two list lengths were used, 7 and 9 digits. ( Anderson and Matessa (1997)  also used lists of length 5, which were almost always recalled correctly.) Two groupings for each list length were used; the groupings were 2-3-2, 3-4, 3-3-3 and 4-5. ( Anderson and Matessa (1997)  used 3-4 and 3-3-3.) Grouping 3-3-3 means a list of 9 items, presented in three groups of 3, and so on. Two participants were assigned to each grouping within a list length. For a specific participant, list length and grouping were the same in all three sessions. For example, a particular participant would be tested in all three sessions with a list of 9 digits and 3-3-3 grouping. In each of the three sessions, trials were divided into five blocks, each of which had 35 trials.

The experiment was run with a MEL program (MEL Professional Version 2.0, Psychology Software Tools, Inc.). The participant began each trial by pressing the space bar, and then a plus sign fixation point appeared. After about  1000 
                            ms 
                         , the first digit was displayed to the right of the fixation point. After about  1000 
                            ms 
                         , the first digit was masked by #, the second digit was displayed to the right of the first digit, and so on, until each digit was displayed for  1000 
                            ms 
                         . After the last digit was presented for  1000 
                            ms 
                         , it was also masked. Following that, a question mark was displayed on the line below prompting the participant to recall the digits immediately. The digits the participant keyed in were visually arranged and grouped just as when they were presented.

We counted the frequency that the entire list was correct, the frequency that each item in the list was correct and in the correct position, and the frequency that two adjacent items in a list were correct, and in the correct positions. We also measured the time at which the participant pressed each key.

For each participant, the data of all three sessions were combined for analysis. The first block of the first session was considered practice, and dropped. The first three trials of each block were also dropped. Thus the total number of trials is 14×32=448 for each participant for purpose of analysis.

As in  Schweickert et al. (1999) , we found that the probability of correct recall of the entire list is not equal to the product of correct recall of the separate items. That is, the items were not recalled independently. This can be seen in  Table 1 .  For example, in the first line, the product of the probabilities that each item is correctly recalled is 0.16, but the probability that the entire list is correctly recalled is 0.42. There is a considerable mean prediction error of 0.19, with all errors in the same direction.

When the previous item is correctly recalled, the current item is more likely to be recalled correctly, as found previously by  Murdock (1968) . In every case,  P ( i | i −1)> P ( i ), see  Table 2 .  The difference  P ( i | i −1)− P ( i ) is considerable, which indicates that the correct recall of item  i  is strongly dependent on the correct recall of the previous item. Also, if the previous item is not correctly recalled, then the current item tends not to be correctly recalled. (It is straightforward to show that  P ( i | i −1)⩾ P ( i ) implies  P ( i |( i −1)′)⩽ P ( i ).) One reason for the dependency might be that the previous item serves as a cue for the current item. When the previous item is correctly recalled, this cue is available, aiding recall of the current item.

From  Table 1 , the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula in  Eq. (1)  provides a good approximation, as found previously ( Schweickert et al., 1999 ). The best fit is for participant 6, for whom the predicted and observed values are the same (when rounded), 0.95. The worst fit is for participant 1, for whom the predicted value is 0.35 and the observed value is 0.42, with error of 0.07. The model does a better job of prediction when the list length is 7 than when the list length is 9.

Although  Eq. (1)  fits the data quite well, it is not exactly correct. All errors are in the same direction, so the equation can be rejected at the 0.01 level by a sign test.

Eq. (2) , used by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , leads to  Eq. (3)  if it is extended in a natural way to failure to recall items, and if assumptions are made about when a group can be considered, based on observation, to have been retrieved.

To test  Eq. (3) , the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed ranks test ( Siegel, 1956 ) was used. A slightly stronger assumption about when a group is retrieved is used to test pairs of items within the same group and pairs in different groups, so results are reported for the two cases separately. If the stronger assumption is made throughout, it allows us to derive the cross product formula in  Eq. (3)  under the more general assumptions given in the section on recall conditional on events. These assumptions do not require the events we condition on to be retrieval of groups presented to the participants. Therefore, the test we make is valid for the more general assumptions. If the cross-product formula is true, it must hold for all pairs of items; in particular, it must hold when the pairs of items are classified into the two separate cases considered here.

Consider pairs of items in different groups. For each participant, for every pair of items from different groups, the value of the right-hand side of  Eq. (3)  was subtracted from the value of the left-hand side. Because the number of relevant pairs differs for participants with different list lengths and groupings, the average difference per pair was calculated for each participant. Because every participant has the same number of trials, it is convenient to evaluate  Eq. (3)  in terms of frequencies rather than probabilities, i.e., to multiply each side by 448×448.

The average difference was negative for only two subjects (both with grouping 4-5). In terms of frequencies, the median of the average differences is 42.6. When the average differences are rank ordered by absolute value, the total rank of the negative differences is 3. With the Wilcoxon test,  Eq. (3)  is rejected at the 0.05 level.

For pairs of items in the same group, the average difference per pair was positive for all eight participants. (As explained in the introduction, the test is not applied with groups of size two.) When the two participants with groupings 2-3-2 are dropped, the median average difference is 252.1, in terms of frequencies. The total rank of the negative average differences is 0. With the Wilcoxon test,  Eq. (3)  is rejected at the 0.05 level.

A brief interpretation is that the left-hand side of the cross product dominates because of the dependencies between successes in recall, and between failures in recall.

We used the model fitting software used by  Anderson and Matessa (1997, p. 735)  to estimate parameters for their prediction based on timing. For each participant, we used Excel solver to search for optimal parameters base-time, B; time exp, b; acc exp, c; odds factor, C; and intercept. The relation between these parameters and those in the text of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  is in  Appendix B , with other details about the model fitting.

The predictions of the model of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  are in  Table 1 . To the eye, it fits well. In three cases, the absolute error is 0.01. In the worst case, participant 2, the absolute error is 0.18.

It is informative to compare the precision of the Product of Adjacent Conditionals prediction with that of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . We report three measures. For the Anderson and Matessa theory, the average absolute error is 0.06, while for the Product of Adjacent Conditionals, it is 0.03.  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  report the percent of variance accounted for by their theory, so we do the same. For their theory, the percent of variance accounted for is 96.0. For the Product of Adjacent Conditionals, it is 99.8. For the Anderson and Matessa theory, the total  G 
                         2  (a measure similar to chi square) over the participants is 156.01 and for the Product of Adjacent Conditionals,  G 
                         2  is 47.88. For each model, parameters are estimated, but not from the 8 observations to be predicted, so df=8 for each. The Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula has a better fit in terms of  G 
                         2 , but otherwise the performance of the two predictors is very similar.

Our conclusion is that both models fit reasonably well, although both miss some aspects of the data. For the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula, the prediction errors were always in the same direction, and a sign test showed it was not exactly correct. The prediction errors for the Anderson and Matessa theory are positive for 5 of the 8 participants, and it cannot be rejected by a sign test. However, a slight extension of the theory leads to the cross product prediction of  Eq. (3) , which was rejected.

One way grouping manifests itself by a jump in the response time or probability correct for recall of the first item in each group. From the probability and timing data in  Fig. 1 ,  one could argue that the participants displayed little grouping, and thus do not provide a good situation for evaluating the  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  theory or its Product of Group Conditionals formula. In the next experiment, additional steps were taken to induce grouping.

The procedure again followed closely that reported by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . As before, we used visual spaces to separate groups when a list was displayed or recalled. In a deviation from their procedure, we also used different colors for each group of digits. Further, before each block, the participant saw an instruction reminding him or her to group the items.

The method was the same as in the previous experiment, except for the following changes.

Nine introductory Psychology students participated for course credit. Two were assigned to each grouping at random. An unexpected additional participant who arrived was arbitrarily assigned to the 3-4 grouping.

Digits had different colors depending on their group. The first group was blue, the second red. If there was a third, it was green.

Before each block, an instruction was given to remind the participant about the grouping to be used.

As in Experiment 1, certain trials were considered practice and not analyzed. As before, the total number of test trials was 14×32=448 for each participant.

The grouping strategy was more successful in Experiment 2. In  Fig. 2 ,  the time to recall the first item of each group can be seen to be relatively long, compared to the time to recall the other items in the group.

Once again, we found that the probability of correct recall of the entire list is not equal to the product of correct recall of individual items. This can be seen from  Table 3 .  For example, in line 3, the product of the probabilities that each item is correctly recalled is 0.04, but the probabilities that entire list is correctly recalled is 0.42.

There is a considerable average absolute error of 0.14 between the probability of correctly recalling the entire list and the product of the marginal probabilities of correctly recalling the individual items.

As in  Murdock (1968)  and our Experiment 1, when the previous item is correctly recalled, the current item is more likely to be correctly recalled. In the data, in every case,  P ( i | i −1)> P ( i ) (see  Table 4 ).  For some participants, the difference  P ( i | i −1)− P ( i ) is considerable, which indicates that the correct recall of item  i  is very dependent on the correct recall of previous item.

From  Table 3 , the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula ( Eq. (1) ) provides a good approximation to the probability of recalling the entire list. The best cases are participants 1 and 9 for whom the error is 0.01. For these participants the product of marginal probabilities is a good approximation as well. The worst case is participant 3 for whom the error is 0.17.

In this section, we test in isolation the hypothesis that the probability of recalling an entire list is the product of the probabilities of retrieving each group, times the probability of recalling each item, given its group is retrieved ( Eq. (2) ). We test two predictions.

We first test the Product of Group Conditionals formula, as in Experiment 1, by testing the cross product  Eq. (3) .  Eq. (3)  follows from a slight extension of the Product of Group Conditionals formula ( Eq. (2) ) used by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . This test is at the level of items.

For each pair of items, for each participant, the left-hand side minus the right-hand side of  Eq. (3)  was calculated. The difference averaged over pairs of items from different groups was positive for all 9 participants. In terms of frequencies, the median of the average differences was 103.5. When the absolute values of the differences are ranked, the total rank of the negative differences is 0. By the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed ranks test,  Eq. (3)  is rejected at the 0.01 level.

For pairs of items in the same group, the difference averaged over pairs was also positive for all 9 participants. When the two participants with grouping 2-3-2 are omitted (see introduction), the median of the average differences was 143.1 in terms of frequencies. Applying the Wilcoxon test to the remaining 7 participants,  Eq. (3)  is rejected at the 0.05 level.

The rejection of  Eq. (3)  makes it unlikely that the Product of Group Conditionals Equation  (2)  holds, because  Eq. (3)  follows from  Eq. (2)  and other related assumptions. It seems that taking grouping into account in this way does not provide sufficient information for predicting the recall of an entire list.

Rejection of  Eq. (3)  implies the rejection of  Eqs. (4), (5), and (6) . That is, it is not possible to find events such that the probability of recalling an entire list, the probability of recalling all but one, and the probability of recalling all but two can be written as products of conditional probabilities, conditioned on these events.

The reader may note that the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula also leads to the cross product  Eq. (3) , provided the subscripts are restricted to items that are not adjacent. It is not necessary to use  Eq. (3)  to test the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula, because a more direct test has already been provided. The formula underestimates the probability of recalling the entire list for all 12 participants in  Schweickert et al. (1999) , and for all 17 participants in Experiments 1 and 2 here. Hence, the hypothesis that the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula in  Eq. (1)  is exactly true can be rejected by a sign test.

Because there is evidence of grouping in this experiment, we can pursue a second test of the Product of Group Conditionals formula at the level of groups. Is the probability of recalling an entire list equal to the product of the probabilities that each group is recalled?  Eq. (2)  is easily seen to lead to this prediction, if we assume a group is correctly recalled if all the items in the group are correctly recalled. Note that the ancillary assumptions leading to  Eq. (3)  are not needed here; in other words, we have a test of the Product of Group Conditionals formula on its own.

We calculated the product of the probabilities that each group is correctly recalled. These values are in the column named “Product of Group Marginals” in  Table 3 . One can see that the product of the probabilities that each group is correctly recalled is approximately equal to the probability of the correct recall of the entire list. The average absolute error is only 0.06. However, for each participant, the product of group probabilities is smaller than the observed probability of recalling the entire list. This second prediction of  Eq. (2)  can be rejected by a sign test, at the 0.01 level. The probability of recalling a complete group includes enough information about the dependencies between items to make the Product of Group Marginals a good approximation, but it is not exactly correct.

The Product of Group Marginals is a better approximation to the probability of recalling the entire list than the Product of Adjacent Conditionals for 5 of the 9 subjects; clearly, the two formulas are of about the same accuracy. We note that both the Product of Group Marginals and the Product of Adjacent Conditionals are closer to the probability of recalling the entire list in the case of list length 7 than 9. In practice, the Product of Group Marginals would not be useful for predicting recall of an entire list, because to use it one needs to know for each group the probability all the items in the group are recalled. We also note that recall of groups is not independent, see  Table 5 .

For the model of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , the predicted values are close to the observed values. In  Table 3  for two participants the error is 0 (when rounded). The worst case is participant 6 with an error of 0.18.

To compare, for the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula, the average absolute error between predicted and observed values is 0.06, while for the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , it is 0.05. For the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula, the proportion of variance accounted for is  r 
                         2 =0.980, while for the Anderson and Matessa theory is  r 
                         2 =0.967. As in Experiment 1, for these measures the performance of both predictors is quite good and about the same. For the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula,  G 
                         2  is 212.6, and for the Anderson and Matessa theory  G 
                         2  is 153.3, with  9 
                            df 
                          in each case. In this experiment,  G 
                         2  favors the Anderson and Matessa theory. Perhaps the grouping evident in Experiment 2 lead the Anderson and Matessa theory to perform better in terms of  G 
                         2  than the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula. But we caution that a large difference in  G 
                         2  between the two predictors can be attributed to one participant. For Participant 2, the observed probability of 0.14 was predicted closely by the Anderson and Matessa theory, while the predicted values of 0.03 correct and 0.97 incorrect for the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula contributed 100.5 to  G 
                         2 .

The experiments show it is unlikely that probability of recall of an entire list can be exactly predicted by a product of marginal or conditional probabilities. The failure of products of probabilities suggests it is not fruitful to model recall of an entire list in terms of one event followed by another, followed by another and so on. Such sequences lead to products of probabilities. Our results also suggest that experiments investigating differences in associations would be more sensitive if recall of entire lists (as in memory span) is used as the dependent variable, rather than probability of recall of individual items (as in serial position curves).

We find that the product of the marginal probabilities that the individual items are correct is considerably less than the probability of the correct recall of the entire list, and conclude, following  Murdock (1968) , that individual items are not recalled independently. The conditional probability of recalling an item, given its predecessor was recalled correctly, is greater than the marginal probability. This fact reveals strong adjacency effects; the correct recall of an item depends on correct recall of its predecessor.

The simple chaining hypothesis directly explains that  P ( i | i −1)> P ( i ), by assuming adjacent items are associated. The fact that the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula in  Eq. (1)  is approximately correct is, of course, empirical support for the simple chaining hypothesis. But the fact that  Eq. (1)  is not exactly correct shows that the simple chaining hypothesis is not sufficient to explain the data.

Further, chaining is not necessarily the mechanism leading to  P ( i | i −1)> P ( i ) and to  Eq. (1) . For example, in the Start-End Model ( Henson, 1998 ), once an item is recalled it is suppressed during recall of later items. Hence, if an item is recalled in its correct position, the probability increases that the next item is recalled in its correct position.

Another example is the model of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  itself. It explicitly uses association of items to positions, rather than chaining. Yet it too predicts  P ( i | i −1)> P ( i ). The dependency arises from  Eq. (2) , for adjacent items in the same group, see  Appendix C . Other details of the recall procedure also contribute to this result, see Anderson and Matessa, p. 738.

As a final example, consider an attribute such as alertness that varies from trial. 
                         1 
                      
                      
                         1 
                         We thank William H. Batchelder for this suggestion. 
                       Suppose on a given trial, recall of the individual items is independent, but suppose the probability of recalling item in a particular position is greater if the participant is alert than if he or she is not alert. To be specific, let random variable  A  be 1 when the participant is not alert, and 2 when the participant is alert. Suppose the probability the participant is alert on any given trial is 0.5. For position  i , let  P ( i | A =1) be the probability of recalling the item in position  i , given the participant is not alert. Other quantities are denoted similarly. Suppose for each position  i ,  P ( i | A =1)< P ( i | A =2). Then 
                         
                            P(i−1 & i)=P(i−1 & i|A=1)P(A=1)+ P(i−1 & i|A=2)P(A=2)=P(i−1|A=1)P(i|A=1)P(A=1)+ P(i−1|A=2)P(i|A=2)P(A=2)>(0.5)[P(i−1|A=1)+P(i−1|A=2)](0.5)[P(i|A=1)+P(i|A=2)]=P(i−1)P(i). 
                         
                      Hence,  P ( i | i −1)> P ( i ).

Note that the last two models have no particular explanation for why the product of adjacent conditionals formula would give a good approximation to the probability of recalling an entire list.

Whatever is producing the dependencies between adjacent items, we note that it operates quickly enough for the items to be presented, as in  Murdock's (1968)  experiment, at about the rate at which they are ordinarily pronounced, three items per second. Moreover, the mechanism producing dependencies between adjacent items can operate over long filled intervals.  Howard and Kahana (1999)  found a large probability of recalling item  i +1 immediately after recalling item  i  in free recall of lists presented with a  16 
                         s 
                       arithmetic task intervening between each pair of items. They concluded it is not likely that the high probability of successively recalling items successively presented is due to adjacent items being in short-term memory together during presentation. Instead,  Howard and Kahana (1999)  say that as items are presented the context changes slowly, so that successive items become associated with the same context at presentation, even when separated by an intervening task. Then at recall, when an item is recalled, its context is retrieved as well. Associations to this context lead to recall of the successor item.

The experiments here allow us to evaluate the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula, a simple equation using quantities easily calculated from data. It gives a close lower bound to the probability of the correct recall of an entire list, and is close enough to be useful as an approximation to it. The formula takes into consideration both the marginal probability that an item is recalled, and the conditional probability of the correct recall of the current item given its predecessor is correctly recalled.

How does one evaluate an approximation? It must be easy to use and must fit well, characteristics of the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula. In particular, experiments here show the approximation is good when participants group the items, a situation it was not applied to previously. Another consideration is how its performance compares with that of the best available prediction from theory, in this case, that of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . For predicting recall of the entire list, the theory and the approximation are about equally good.

Because the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula in  Eq. (1)  is approximately, but not exactly, correct, it is worth considering other products of conditional probabilities. The product of conditional probabilities formulas in  Eqs. (4), (5) and (6)  are attractive because they allow dependencies other than those between adjacent items, but they avoid the complexity of using all possible dependencies. However, these equations lead to the cross-product formula of  Eq. (3) , which the experiments here reject.

A related attractive alternative is the Product of Group Conditionals formula ( Eq. (2) ) used by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) . It contains expressions for probabilities of unobservable events, so by itself, it cannot be used to predict recall of an entire list, and leads to no goodness of fit measures. But when it is extended to include failures to recall one or two items, it too leads to the rejected cross-product formula. (Our test of the Product of Group Conditionals formula through the cross-product equation is possible because the probabilities of unobservable events cancel in the equation actually tested.) Further, in itself the Product of Group Conditionals formula leads to the prediction that the probability an entire list is recalled equals the product of the probabilities that each group is recalled (the Product of Groups formula), and this too was rejected.

The theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  has several versions, with optional components for activities such as guessing. Rejection of  Eq. (3)  implies that a certain version of the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  is rejected, namely, the version using  Eq. (2) , together with the assumptions leading to  Eq. (3) .

The theory accounts for a number of phenomena, including effects of serial position, list length, delay, word length, positional confusion, acoustic confusion and articulatory suppression.  Eq. (2)  is a central equation of the theory, used, for example, in the account of the effects of serial position and list length. However, accounts of some effects, such as acoustic confusions, do not rely on  Eq. (2) . Of course, such accounts are unaffected by our results.

The Product of Adjacent Conditionals approximation and the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  each predict probability of recall of an entire list well. It is informative to see how their predictions are correlated with each other, and with other quantities such as list length.

Predicted recall of the entire list according to the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula is highly correlated with recall predicted by the  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  model (see  Table 6 ,  column 4). However, the errors of the two models are susceptible to different things.

Error here refers to the absolute value of the difference between the observed probability of recall of an entire list and the probability predicted by a model. As list length increases, the error in the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula increases (see  Table 7 ,  column 2). This is an undesirable property, caused perhaps by an increase in remote associations with longer lists. In favor of the theory of Anderson and Matessa its prediction error is not significantly correlated with list length ( Table 7 , column 2).

An undesirable property of the Anderson and Matessa prediction is that its error is significantly correlated with the observed probability of recalling a list ( Table 7 , last column). For the Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula, this correlation is not significant ( Table 7 , column 3).

One sign that a model is dealing effectively with grouping would be that the errors of the model are not affected by the number of groups. The Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula does not explicitly take grouping into account. Recall of one group is allowed to be dependent on recall of another group only via the dependency between the first item of a group and the last item of the preceding group. Nonetheless, for the limited number of groupings used here, 2 or 3 groups, the error in the Product of Adjacent Conditionals model is very little affected by the number of groups ( Table 7 , column 1).

On the other hand, although the Anderson and Matessa theory has an explicit way of incorporating grouping, the absolute error in the Anderson and Matessa model is significantly correlated with the number of groups ( Table 7 , column 1). This suggests that the way the Anderson and Matessa model incorporates groups does not entirely account for the effect of groups. It does not appear that the problem can be rectified in a simple way, because a change in the grouping changes expressions in the theory in a complicated way.

As a measure of performance, the probability of recalling an entire list includes dependencies between items not included in recall of individual items. Under our experimental conditions, most of the difference can be attributed to dependence between adjacent items. The Product of Adjacent Conditionals formula ( Schweickert et al., 1999 ) fares well as an approximation for successive presentation without rehearsal, simultaneous presentation with rehearsal, and for grouping without rehearsal, all with visual presentation and typed recall. It is an open question whether the formula will work well under other conditions. One can be pretty sure, for example, that it would fare badly for lists with built in remote associations.

To understand recall of entire lists, our results suggest the priority for now is to deepen our understanding of dependencies between adjacent items. It would be useful if researchers routinely reported the conditional probability of recalling item  i , given recall of item  i −1 (or, equivalently, reported transitional error probabilities). If this were done whenever the usual serial position curves were reported, we would begin to find out whether some experimental factors have a special effect on recall of entire lists. Meanwhile, the challenge of accounting for nonadjacent dependencies in a simple way remains open.

This work was supported in part by NSF Grant SBR-9601465. We thank Ian Neath for very helpful comments on an earlier version. This work is based on a master's thesis of the first author, under the supervision of the second.

In the theory of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , activation determines how available information will be, it controls the level of the recall of items and groups. The value of the activation is 
                         
                            (A.1) 
                            A i =−d 
                               ln (t i )+S/n 
                         
                      where  A 
                      
                         i 
                       is the activation of item  i  or group  i ,  d  is the decay rate,  t 
                      
                         i 
                       is the time since the item (or group) was last used, and  S / n  is the associative strength from the list to the element  i . Parameter  S  is the strength of self-activation, and  n  is the list length.

The time  t 
                      
                         i 
                       since the last use of item  i  or group  i  is the sum of the times required for all productions carried out since its last use. The time to carry out each production in a sequence is the action time  P  (set at the ACT-R minimum of  0.05 
                         s 
                       for productions that involved no physical action and  0.20 
                         s 
                       for productions that involved typing) plus retrieval time  F 
                         exp (−fA i )  (the time to retrieve a knowledge unit) where  F  is the time-scale parameter and  f  is the activation scale parameter). The time for a production, then, is  time=P+F 
                         exp (−fA i ) .

The predicted probability of retrieving item  i  or group  i  is 
                         
                            
                               prob 
                               i =1/(1+ exp (−(A i −τ)/s)), 
                         
                      where  τ  is a threshold of activation, and  s  is the activation noise. ( Anderson and Matessa, 1997 , p. 731, also say the above formula gives the probability a knowledge unit with expected value  A 
                      
                         i 
                       is above the threshold. It is hard to interpret this, because it is inconsistent with earlier use of  A 
                      
                         i 
                       for activation, rather than expected activation.)

The probability of retrieving (or recalling) the entire list is the product of the probabilities of retrieving (or recalling) each item through productions called the “get-next” productions and the probabilities of retrieving each group through productions called the “next-group” productions ( Anderson & Matessa, 1997 , p. 736).

The parameters were fit using an Excel program made available by Anderson and Matessa for this purpose ( http://act.psy.cmu.edu ). Parameter values are estimated to minimize the squared deviations between certain observed and predicted values. According to  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , the following objective is to be minimized, 
                         
                            Σ[( 
                                  T 
                                  ̂ 
                               
                               i − 
                                  T 
                                  ̄ 
                               
                               i ) 2 +30( 
                                  P 
                                  ̂ 
                               
                               i − 
                                  P 
                                  ̄ 
                               
                               i ) 2 ], 
                         
                      where  
                         
                            T 
                            ̂ 
                         
                         i 
                       is the predicted production time,  
                         
                            T 
                            ̄ 
                         
                         i 
                       is the observed time,  
                         
                            P 
                            ̂ 
                         
                         i = prob 
                         i =time  is the predicted probability of recall, and  
                         
                            P 
                            ̄ 
                         
                         i 
                       is the observed probability of recall. Actually, the EXCEL program of Anderson and Matessa uses a different component for accuracy in the objective function, not easily summarized here. In our parameter estimation we used the objective function above, from the article.

The Excel program for model fitting is provided by Anderson and Matessa at the site  http://act.psy.cmu.edu . It was modified (a) to apply to groupings 2-3-2 and 4-5 not used by  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , and to use the number of trials for our experiments, (b) to use the objective function in the text of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , see  Appendix A , and (c) to correct typos in cells R57 and R58 of the original. 
                         Remarks 
                         In the Excel program, Solver minimizes an objective function by changing values of 5 parameters. Labels and symbols used for these are different in the program and the text, so the correspondences are listed in  Table 8 .

In the Excel program, Solver minimizes an objective function by changing values of 5 parameters. Labels and symbols used for these are different in the program and the text, so the correspondences are listed in  Table 8 .

In the Excel program of  Anderson and Matessa (1997) , one of the parameters to be estimated, intercept, has estimated value 0.640 seconds. In  Table 2  of the text, the corresponding parameter is apparently labeled start-up time, with estimated value  690 
                         ms 
                      .

For most participants in our experiments, when Solver iterated automatically the last iteration produced an error message. Hence, iterations of Solver were stepped through by hand, stopping with the best solution prior to the message. At this point, further iterations were producing little change in the objective function. The resulting solution is valid, and gives a good fit. It may not be optimal.

Consider items  i −1 and  i , within the same group  G . The probability item  i  is recalled correctly given item  i −1 was recalled correctly is greater than or equal to the marginal probability that item  i  is recalled correctly. To see this, note that from  Eq. (2) , the probability that item  i  is recalled correctly equals the probability its group is retrieved, times the probability item  i  is recalled, given its group is retrieved. Then 
                         
                            P(i|i−1)= 
                                  P(i−1&i) 
                                  P(i−1) 
                               = 
                                  P(G)P(i−1|G)P(i|G) 
                                  P(G)P(i−1|G) 
                               =P(i|G)⩾P(i|G)P(G)=p(i).

In addition, other mechanisms are at work in the model of  Anderson and Matessa (1997, p. 738) . For example, if the position of the current item has already been mistakenly assigned to another item, the current item will be assigned to another position. These secondary mechanisms introduce dependencies between the items not covered by  Eq. (2) . The dependencies are in a direction consistent with the inequality above.

Now consider adjacent items  i −1 and  i , where item  i −1 is in group  G ∗ 
                       and item  i  is in group  G . If the probability of correct recall is determined entirely by  Eq. (2) , then the following shows that recall of items  i −1 and  i  is independent. 
                         
                            P(i|i−1)= 
                                  P(i−1&i) 
                                  P(i−1) 
                               = 
                                  P(G ∗ )P(i−1|G ∗ )P(G)P(i|G) 
                                  P(G ∗ )P(i−1|G ∗ ) 
                               =P(G)P(i|G)=P(i).

Again, mechanisms at work in addition to  Eq. (2)  in the model of  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  introduce dependencies. These tend to make  P ( i | i −1) greater than  P ( i ). In short, a model based purely on  Eq. (2)  predicts independence between items in different groups. The  Anderson and Matessa (1997)  model predicts dependence.