10.1016/j.jmp.2004.02.004
Sandra L. Schneider and James Shanteau (Eds.); Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2003, pp. xxii + 713, price $95 (cl), ISBN 0-521-80151-6

This volume was complied to meet a perceived need. In the preface, the editors identify the origin of the idea of the book with the 1996 meeting of the Society for Judgment and Decision Making in Chicago, from which there emerged the intention of producing “a book that would explore some exciting recent advances in JDM research” (p. xix). Goals of the book, as the editors express them, were “to provide a forum for fresh perspectives on decision making…, to expose readers to a wide variety of promising perspectives for enhancing the scope of judgment and decision-making research” (p. 1), and to provide an answer “by a top group of experts to the question ‘Where is judgment and decision research heading as we forge into the 21st century?”’ (p. 2). If asked what I believe the answer to the question to be, having read the book, I would have to say that judgment and decision research is heading in several directions, and that this is so because of an increasing awareness that these activities are more complicated and subject to the influence of more variables than was once believed to be the case.

Several contributors point out limitations of prevailing theories of judgment and decision making, argue the disutility of decision aids that have been developed to enhance decision making by counteracting common failings, challenge traditional ways of evaluating the quality of decisions, or note discontent with the focus or methods of recent work.

Luce makes the observation that subjective expected utility (SEU) has long been considered normative for rational decision making under uncertainty, and notes that this theory has been shown to be flawed, from a descriptive point of view, in the treatment of gambles with mixed gains and losses. He notes further that there is some question as to the adequacy of SEU as a normative theory—as to whether it really captures what most people mean by rationality. He explores the theoretical implications of adding to the traditional axiomatic representation of SEU certain new primitives— no change from the status quo  and  joint receipt —and axioms involving the latter concept. He shows that one can end up with “two equally rationally based theories with quite different predictions (or prescriptions) in cases of mixed gains and losses” with no obvious way to chose between them.

Rettinger and Hastie challenge the assumption “that all important decisions are like preferences among formal gambles”, (p. 166)—the  gamble metaphor —which they see as the prevailing view in the decision-making literature. “Instead, we advocate the view that the contents of a decision will dramatically affect not only choice outcomes, but the  way  the decision is made” (p. 166). An important determinant of how decisions are made, they contend, is the way in which decision scenarios are understood by decision makers. The use of simple gambles as the prototype for studying decision making facilitates experimentation in much the way that the use of nonsense syllables once facilitated memory research, by controlling for the effects of world knowledge on performance. However, because world knowledge plays a role in real-world decisions, the consequence is to limit the generalizability of any results beyond the decontextualized situations in which they were obtained.

Rettinger and Hastie focus particularly on two variables that are likely to be affected by content in decision making: the mental representation of a decision situation and the strategy selected to make a decision. Several content effects are noted that illustrate that the use of different cover stories with which to present the same underlying gamble can yield different judgments or decisions. In the absence of auxiliary principles, expected utility models are unable, the authors contend, to accommodate such content effects and others that have been found. They present a taxonomy of seven decision strategies inferred from verbal protocols obtained from an experiment in which the participants thought aloud while making decisions designed to reveal effects of context-specific variables

Yates, Veinott and Patalano note the paucity of hard evidence that decision aids designed to counteract common violations of the axioms of expected utility theory have been applied effectively in many practical situations. They review several approaches that have been taken to decision aiding and contend that general decision support systems (typically computer-based systems designed to support people's natural decision-making activities) and expert systems (computer-based systems capable of solving problems of specific types at the level of human experts) have proved to be more widely used than most other approaches. As to why this is the case, they suggest that these systems do better than alternative approaches in several respects: breadth of decision quality aspects covered, provision of facts about the substance of the decision problem of interest (as opposed to improving the procedure for deciding), making the decision process easier or more natural, and increasing the obviousness of the positive effects of a likely decision outcome. They argue that decision aids are unlikely to be used unless potential users believe they will make decisions easier and their outcomes better than they otherwise would be; a main reason why people do not use them, they surmise, is that they are generally satisfied with their unaided performance as decision makers in the past.

On the basis of data collected with questionnaires about past decisions, Yates et al. propose several characteristics of decisions that determine how deciders perceive them in terms of such qualifiers as hard or easy and good or bad. A decision is commonly considered hard, for example, when the potential for serious loss is great; and the goodness or badness of a decision is commonly judged on the basis of the desirability or undesirability of its outcome.

The emphasis that people put on outcomes is contrasted with the equating by decision analysts of decision quality with the rationality—internal consistency or coherence—of the process used to select among action options. Yates et al. note that their “empirical results suggest that real deciders rarely acknowledge a concern with the rationality of their decision processes and certainly not in the coherence sense. Instead, they are preoccupied with results—good outcomes of various sorts” (p. 31). They argue that the quality of decisions is typically assessed by deciders not in terms of the unidimensional construct of expected utility but rather in terms of several distinct and imperfectly correlated aspects, which will differ among deciders and perhaps even for a given decider in different contexts. Other contributors also comment on the question of how decisions should be evaluated. Schneider and Barnes, for example, contend that personal satisfaction and fulfillment may be more important than such traditional criteria as consistency and coherence.

Reyna, Lloyd and Brainerd claim pervasive discontent with standard demonstrations of judgment-and-decision errors, not because of disbelief of the findings—which they acknowledge are, in many cases, easy to replicate—but because the standard view, which emphasizes the shortcomings of human reasoning, is seen as incomplete in not providing adequate processing explanations for effects. On the other hand, evolutionary theory, while reacting to the idea that “nature could have left humanity so poorly equipped… does not provide specific guidance as to the quality of any particular aspect of human reasoning” (p. 205). Claims of the adaptiveness of specific biases or behaviors—as evidenced by their survival—are not compelling in the authors’ view, because such claims rest on the assumption that existence equates to adaptiveness. Reyna et al. reject also the idea that people use heuristic shortcuts primarily because of memory limitations or the mental effort required to use more cognitively or computationally demanding approaches to judgment and decision making.

Clancy, Elliot, Ley, Omodei, Wearing, McLennan and Thorsteinsson characterize “most laboratory research on decision making” as being “focused on single decisions, ranging from the relatively simple, such as choosing a gamble, to the relatively complex, such as a simulated decision to recall or not recall a possibly defective product” (p. 588), and their assessment of it is rather harsh: “The bulk of this laboratory research has typically employed highly artificial tasks, and as such has yielded mostly trivial outcomes” (p. 588). My guess is that some contributors to this volume would find this assessment a bit too severe, but others would agree with it.

Having competing normative theories of rational decision making, which prescribe different actions in the same situation, is unsettling. How is one to determine the rational thing to do? Having shown that a theory different from SEU, but equally defensible as a prescription for rational decision making, can be constructed by distinguishing gains from losses and adding a binary operation of  joint receipt , the implications of which he spells out in some detail, Luce raises the question of whether there is a deeper sense of rationality that permits one to select between the two formulations considered. The question is left as a challenge for future research; for the nonce, “perhaps… we simply have to live with the fact that what seems rational depends more on the formulation of the domain of study than we had previously acknowledged” (p. 81).

Reyna, Lloyd and Brainerd recognize degrees of rationality, and define rationality in terms of adherence to several principles: “our conception of rationality is the degree to which reasoning fits a cognitive ideal whose components are knowledge, accurate representation of information, recognizing the gist of a problem, reliance on appropriate gist representations rather than surface details, resisting interference from inappropriate gist, retrieval of relevant reasoning principles in context, and implementing those principles coherently” (p. 224). It follows that irrationality, according to this view, can manifest itself in various ways and to various degrees. An important aspect of the view is that the validity of any given principle is determined by its relevance in context.

The point of departure for Birnbaum and Martin is the finding by  Birnbaum and Navarrete (1998)  that many people make decisions that violate the principle of stochastic dominance, according to which if Gamble A always gives at least as good a prize as Gamble B, and sometimes a better one, the former should always be preferred to the latter. The stated purpose of the chapter is to examine, by reviewing several experiments done by the authors following that of Birnbaum and Navarrete, the conditions under which the stochastic dominance principle is violated. Several theoretical models are considered with reference to their ability, or lack thereof, to account for the dominance violations with decisions involving event splitting (in which a possible outcome of a bet is split into two possible outcomes with a combined probability equal to the probability of the original option) or event coalescing (the inverse). The data reported indicate that the violation of stochastic dominance can be increased or decreased as a consequence of event splitting, depending on particulars.

Martignon and Krauss contend that how people make decisions varies with the situations in which the decisions are made. Following a brief summarization of the major trends in the study of reasoning under uncertainty over the past 60 or so years, they focus on two claims stemming from recent work of Gigerenzer and the ABC research group (The Center for Adaptive Behavior in Cognition): (1) “that people integrate several pieces of information in a Bayesian way when provided with natural frequencies” [as distinct from probabilities or relative frequencies], and (2) “that people use fast and frugal heuristics for multiple-cue decision making” (p. 111). These claims appear to be mutually contradictory and the task Martignon and Krauss set for themselves is to reconcile them.

Martignon and Krauss argue that both claims—that people function as Bayesians when dealing with frequency information and that they use fast and frugal heuristics—“can live together in peace within the same decision-making framework” (p. 115). People use both approaches, they argue, switching from one to the other in response to characteristics of the decision situation. In support of this contention, they present data from an experiment in which participants had to make buy or sell decisions with respect to a company's stock on the basis of evaluations published by three stock-trade magazines. Each magazine had a validity rating, and whether the participants tended to use a Bayesian approach or Gigerenzer's Take-the-Best heuristic depended on the magnitude of the differences among the magazines rated validities; in particular, if one of the validity ratings was much larger than the others, participants tended to use the Take-the-Best strategy, whereas if the ratings were close in value, they were more likely to use a Bayesian approach. The investigators interpret this result as supportive of the general idea that how people approach decision tasks depends on the particulars of the situation.

Schneider and Barnes also stress the importance of the context in which a decision is made as a determinant of the values one attaches to the choice alternatives: “the choice between a new stereo system and a gallon of water may seem obvious, unless of course the context involves being stranded in a desert” (p. 398). Actually, it seems pretty obvious in the latter case too, but the point about the relevance of context is well made.

Several contributors draw attention to specific variables that have been somewhat neglected in the study of judgment and decision making, but that are becoming the focus of research.

Dougherty, Gronlund and Gettys argue that the role of memory in judgment and decision making processes has not received the attention it deserves, and, further, that “a small number of simple memory mechanisms is sufficient to account for a wide array of judgment and decision-making phenomena” (p. 127). Their chapter focuses on three aspects of memory that they see as fundamental to judgment and decision making: “(1) representational properties, (2) retrieval from memory, and (3) experience and domain knowledge” (p. 131). Different types of memory representation (e.g., instance-based and abstraction-based) have different implications for judgment and decision processes, and how well information is encoded in memory can affect how effectively people judge such variables as frequency and probability. Judgments of conditional probabilities require the ability to retrieve from memory representations of the relevant sets and subsets. The role of experience and domain knowledge is seen in how the approach people take to a judgment or decision problem depends on their degree of familiarity with the problem situation; if the situation is one they have faced many times, their response is likely to be based on what they recall from previous experiences, whereas if the situation is novel they are more likely to resort to rule-based behavior.

Although theory development is not the top priority of natural decision making (NDM) researchers, Pliske and Klein note that NDM research has been guided by several models, the one most closely associated with the NDM perspective being the Recognition-Primed Decision model first proposed by Klein and his colleagues. As its name suggests, this model emphasizes the role of memory of similar situations as the first resource to which decision makers turn in dealing with decision problems. According to this model, experienced decision makers use their experience to generate a reasonable—not necessarily optimal—option quickly, without considering lots of alternatives. The model is descriptive and does not prescribe what decision makers should do. Pliske and Klein describe interview data supporting the contention that experienced decision makers in stressful situations typically adopt a course of action without any deliberative evaluation of alternatives and that when evaluation does occur it tends to consist of mentally simulating some of the possible outcomes of the contemplated course of action.

Do people make better decisions when they are held accountable for the decisions they make? The question naturally arises when one considers that much of the evidence that has been collected regarding people's foibles as decision makers has been obtained with college students making decisions under conditions in which accountability is not an issue. One may be forgiven for wondering to what extent the findings in these experiments are generalizable to situations outside the laboratory where people not only have to live with the consequences of their decisions but often have to justify them to themselves and others.

Lerner and Tetlock distinguish between predecision and postdecision accountability. In predecision accountability justification of a decision may be given before or after the decision is made, but knowledge that it will be required comes before. The authors cite experimental evidence that predecision accountability tends to prompt  exploratory  thinking, which can improve the quality of decisions (e.g., by attenuating various kinds of biases even in presumably difficult tasks), but postdecision accountability tends to elicit  confirmatory  thinking aimed at rationalizing the decision that was made. One of the ways in which predecision accountability has its effect is through motivating increased cognitive effort. Lerner and Tetlock note, however, that whether increased cognitive effort will improve the quality of decision making depends on a number of other factors. They present a conceptualization of the decision-making process that takes these moderating factors into account and they suggest conditions under which accountability is likely to attenuate biases and those under which it is not.

It is hard to imagine a question that is more central to judgment and decision making that the one that Schneider and Barnes address: “What do people really want?” Nevertheless, Schneider and Barnes contend, the goals and motives of decision makers have received relatively little attention from researchers as compared to that which has been given to the process of decision making. The major focus has been on  how  people make decisions, they suggest, and the question of  why  they make them has been largely ignored.

Schneider and Barnes report the results of a survey study in which 430 people covering the adult life span were asked to report short- and long-range personal goals. The responses had sufficient commonality that the investigators were able to classify the reported goals in eight categories. Schneider and Barnes take the results of the survey as at least part of the answer to their title question: “Decision makers want to be safe and healthy, they want to have fulfilling relationships, and they want to experience some successes in the domains of education, career pursuits, personal development, and leisurely activities” (p. 423). Bringing goals into the decision-making picture prompts the question regarding utility: “Utility with respect to which goal(s)?” And the fact that some goals are incompatible with others prohibits simply deriving a single value to represent a decision option's utility.

Lerner and Tetlock argue that in judging whether a particular behavior is a cognitive error or bias, the goals—interpersonal, institutional, or political—of the decision maker should be taken into account. A position taken by Reyna, Lloyd and Brainerd with which I found it particularly easy to agree is that rationality has to do with more than assisting people in realizing their goals and that goal selection itself should be considered in judging the quality of cognition.

Schneider and Barnes note that several researchers have made distinctions on the basis of the amount of thought that a decision appears to require. Decisions that are made often (e.g., to brush one's teeth) are made with little or no thought. Such decisions may have required thought the first few times they were made, but became routine or automated with repetition. Schneider and Barnes note a paucity of research on the origin of such “policy decisions” despite their fundamental significance in people's daily lives.

Svenson argues that despite the fact that psychologists have been interested in emotion for a long time, the role of affective variables in decision making has been eclipsed in recent decades by the emphasis on cognition. This is unfortunate, in his view; cognitive values can change as a result of the influence of affect, and vice versa. According to his theory (about which more below), the attractiveness of a decision alternative is determined by both cognitively derived values and affective variables. Svenson distinguishes three types of affective variables that differ with respect to their range and duration of influence: affective traits (long lasting and most pervasive effects), emotions (most fleeting and narrow), and moods (intermediate).

Finucane, Peters and Slovic distinguish among emotion (an intense and typically short-lived state—fear, anger—with identifiable causes), mood (a typically low-intensity feeling that may have no identifiable cause) and affect (“potentially subtle feelings triggered by the object of judgment or choice”) (p. 329). Their chapter focuses on the latter concept. In particular, they propose to use affect as the basis for a framework that explains rather than simply describes nonnormative judgments and decisions.

Finucane et al. suggest that affect influences judgment and decision making by means of positive and negative feelings that are attached to mental representations—images—of decision options. Such feelings depend on characteristics of the individual decision maker and on the nature of the decision task. Because making a decision on the basis of an affective reaction to the options involved can be faster and less cognitively demanding than weighing the pros and cons of the alternatives, Finucane et al. call this use of affect the  affect heuristic . They suggest that the tendency to resort to this heuristic increases under conditions that reduce one's capacity for deliberation, as, for example, when a decision must be made under time pressure or distracting circumstances. Aging, too, they surmise, may increase reliance on affect as a basis for choice.

The goal that Isen and Labroo set themselves is to call attention to two themes regarding the role of affect that have received less recognition in the field of decision making than in cognition more generally: “(1) the influence of positive affect and (2) the contributions that may be obtained from considering the neuropsychological level of analysis” (p. 368). The authors emphasize the importance of recognizing the ability of small and easily induced interventions to produce large effects: “One of the most intriguing findings—and one of the most robust—in this affect literature is that positive affect, induced in simple ways… promotes cognitive flexibility, innovation, problem solving, and creativity, including creative problem solving, in many different contexts” (p. 369).

Too good to be true? At least good enough to make one wonder—especially given what Isen and Labroo refer to as “an earlier, widely held view that positive affect, by its nature, impairs systematic cognitive processing and leads to poor judgment and superficial thinking” (p. 371). Isen and Labroo back up their affectively positive assertions with citations of numerous empirical studies. Their review of recent work (much of it Isen's own), provides a litany of evidences of a positive-affect effect on judgment and decision making—and cognitive processes generally—and of ways and contexts in which it manifests itself. Positive affect may even, they suggest, help counter some of the biases that have been documented in the cognitive and social literature. In the final part of their chapter, Isen and Labroo discuss some current thinking about how the effects of positive affect might be mediated neurologically. The possible roles of the neurotransmitter dopamine and the anterior cingulate region of the brain are noted.

Peterson, Miranda, Smith and Haskell focus on the idea that “decision making, particularly in organizations, is a culturally embedded social activity” (p. 514). One of the ways that culture impacts decision making, the authors suggest, is in the fact that the values and institutions of some societies tend to emphasize the substance of decision making (giving priority to decision makers’ effectiveness) while those of others put more stress on its symbolism (giving priority to decision makers’ social or political standing). Another is in differences among cultures in the value they put on time efficiency and pace. Still another is in differences in the function(s) decision making is seen to serve (e.g., making rational choices versus legitimizing choices already made).

Peterson et al. cite work that illustrates various other ways in which culture influences decision making, including what events flag the need for decisions to be made, how decision situations are perceived, how risk is assessed and judged to be acceptable or unacceptable, and how conflict is managed. Societies differ in the pressures they exert for conformity, in the importance they attach to justice (as opposed to the importance of maintaining relationships), and in the basis on which fairness is judged. The contrast that is most widely recognized by cross-cultural researchers who focus on decision making, they suggest, is the contrast between individualism and collectivism—the extent to which the culture treats the individual or some collective or social entity as the basic unit of society. But even what it means to “make a decision” varies somewhat from culture to culture.

Haines and Moore review a considerable body of research on cognitive development and argue that an adequate theory of judgment and decision making should be able to accommodate the changes that are observed to occur with maturation. They contend that the study of judgment and decision making by children, and of the ways in which these functions change with age, holds the hope of discovering the origins of the strategies, heuristics and biases that characterize adult performance and perhaps of finding ways to improve upon them. Haines and Moore note that although there is some evidence of developmental trends in the use of information, most studies have found that children show many of the same biases as do adults. The findings reviewed “suggest improvement in reasoning skills and strategies with age but no corresponding decrease in biases with age” (p. 269). Considerable attention is given by Haines and Moore to the development of metacognition and its role in changing people's approach to judgment and decision making with maturation.

The review by Kameda, Tindale and Davis of recent work on group decision making identifies many of the factors that influence the way groups deal with decision problems and, in particular, how the choice behavior of groups relates to the preferences and decision-relevant knowledge of the individuals who comprise them. One goal of research on group decision making is the development of models that can predict the choice of a group on the basis of the distribution of preferences over the members of the group. Another is a better understanding of the dynamics of how decision-making groups reach a consensus, when they do. Kameda et al. note that “although a number of factors have been found to influence group decision processes…, one of the more consistent and robust findings from this research has been that majorities/pluralities win most of the time” (p. 464), especially when no particular alternative can be shown to be correct during discussion, in which case “correctness” tends to be defined by consensus and consensus by majority or plurality opinion. In general, the final consensus outcomes of group decision making, Kameda et al. note, are largely determined by the  social-sharedness  of the group members’ initial preferences. Under some conditions considered, the preferences represented by a simple averaging of those of the members of a group can become accentuated in those representing group consensus, a phenomenon that the authors refer to as the  group polarization effect . Kameda et al. note, too, how the process by which group consensus is expressed (voting procedure) can be manipulated so as to affect the decision outcome.

One reason to expect groups to make better decisions than individuals is that groups usually have more knowledge, in the aggregate, that is relevant to the decision to be made than does any individual, at least if one equates the knowledge of the group with the disjunction of the knowledge of its members. How much benefit the grouping of knowledge would have should depend on the degree of commonality of the knowledge of the members—if every member knows precisely what every other member knows, the aggregate knowledge is no greater than that of a single member, but if different members know different things, then what they know in the aggregate surpasses what any of them knows individually.

Research on how shared and unshared knowledge is utilized in group decision making has produced some surprises, one of which—called the  common knowledge effect —is the finding that members of groups do not necessarily offer information they have that is not shared by other members in consensus-forming discussions. It appears that the likelihood that a particular piece of decision-relevant information will be mentioned in discussion increases with the number of group members who have that piece of information. Kameda et al. point out that, although the common knowledge effect is fairly robust, several experimenters have demonstrated ways to attenuate it, and to elicit the volunteering of more unshared information.

Clancy, Elliot, Ley, Omodei, Wearing, McLennan and Thorsteinsson turn their attention to “distributed dynamic decision-making (D3M) contexts”—contexts in which decision responsibility is distributed among several people and the situation is changing dynamically, and often unpredictably, over time. They see such contexts as more representative of real-world situations than the single-decision, single-decision-maker, situations typically studied in the laboratory. Theoretical models developed to account for single-decision behavior, Clancy et al. argue, are not well suited to these kinds of contexts.

Clancy et al. focus on situations in which the decision making is done within a hierarchical command structure, where the time and space horizons may differ for decision makers at different levels of the hierarchy and there may be tradeoffs between realizing more global and more local goals. A question of interest is that of the relative effectiveness of different ways of distributing the control of decision making across levels of the hierarchy. Two approaches to this decision authority distribution are considered: an  action command  style in which specific action commands are issued by the highest level, and an  intent command  style in which a top-level commander's intentions are distributed to subordinates who are relatively free to choose actions to attempt to realize those intentions. Pros and cons of these two approaches are discussed and a simulation study is reported in which the relative effectiveness of the two approaches was investigated using two-level command hierarchies in a computer-generated forest-fire-control simulation.

Commercial globalization and modern communication technology—notably computer networking—ensure the increasing need for decision making by multinational and multicultural groups and across national and cultural contexts. Peterson et al. discuss some of the implications of previous work on cultural effects and note its relevance to the emerging phenomenon of “electronically mediated decision making by geographically dispersed, culturally diverse, virtual teams” (p. 514). They note ways in which electronic communication technology facilitates effective information acquisition and decision making by virtual groups and complications it introduces.

By definition, experts are better at what they do in their areas of expertise than are novices. As Shanteau, Weiss, Thomas and Pounds point out, sometimes it is easy to distinguish experts from novices because there is a “gold standard” against which performance can be assessed; experts are likely to meet the standard whereas novices are not. But when there is no agreed upon gold standard and performance cannot be unequivocally determined to be correct or incorrect, how then are we to tell if someone is an expert? This is the question that Shanteau et al. address.

The authors review a variety of approaches that have been taken to the problem of identifying expert performance, noting what they see as the advantages and, especially, the disadvantages of each. They then describe a ratio defined by Shanteau and Weiss, which borrows a formulation used by Cochran in another context, that is known as the Cochran–Weiss–Shanteau (CWS) ratio. This is a ratio of a measure of  discrimination  and a measure of  inconsistency . The measure of discrimination reflects the degree to which a would-be expert distinguishes between different situations (e.g., different disease symptoms, different air-traffic-control situations); the measure of inconsistency reflects the degree to which one fails to treat the same or similar situations the same way on different occasions. The idea is that a true expert will be discriminating and consistent, getting a high score on a discrimination measure and a low one on an inconsistency measure and thus a very high ratio of the first to the second.

Shanteau et al. illustrate the use of the CWS ratio by applying it to the data of three previous studies involving medical diagnosis, livestock judging and financial auditing. They note some non-trivial limitations of the approach to evaluating expertise—one may be consistent by consistently applying an erroneous rule—but they clearly believe that the results obtained justify further study of what they see as a promising new tool for studying expertise.

Eiser discusses two approaches to the question of how we cope with a complex environment in which many of the events of significance to us are intrinsically uncertain. According to the first approach, we handle complexity through a process of categorization, whereby we treat objects and events as members of classes. According to the second approach, we encode associations between attributes and between events and their consequences and we have the ability to process multiple sources of information simultaneously.

Eiser notes that theories of social categorization have held that people tend to  accentuate  differences between members of different categories. One view of the functionality of categorization is that it simplifies life: by treating members of a class as equivalent—or by responding to people on the basis of class membership—we are saved the trouble of paying attention to within-class differences. Eiser takes exception to this view. “From a point of view of decision making and judgment, what we need is not a predilection to  neglect  information, but a capacity to  recognize  patterning and covariation within the  data structure  offered by our environment” (p. 490). For a process that can meet this need, Eiser looks to connectionism.

Eiser describes two simulations of accentuation effects using connectionist learning processes. The point of these simulations is not to show that the brain necessarily functions in a particular way, but simply “to demonstrate that certain patterns of data in social judgment can be identified and reproduced by a parallel processing system” (p. 505). Eiser does argue that the treatment by much social psychological theory of social judgment as the product of reasoning involving symbolic representations expressed linguistically is implausible and that the demonstration of the adequacy of a simple neural network to make the kinds of discriminations found in social judgment shows that reasoning at a deliberative level is not essential.

The more control a researcher can exercise over the variables that are likely to influence human behavior, the farther he or she is likely to be from the realities of the day-to-day world in which people normally function. For this reason, the applicability to real-world contexts of results obtained in tightly controlled experimental situations is often tenuous at best. This is apparent in the area of judgment and decision making; descriptive theories developed to account for people's performance on carefully designed tasks in the laboratory have been seen by some investigators to have very limited applicability to judgment and decision situations faced by people in the world outside the laboratory. The attempt to study decision making as it occurs in naturalistic settings is one reaction to this perceived limitation. In their chapter, Pliske and Klein begin with a brief recounting of the history of the development of what has become known as the natural decision making (NDM) perspective, of the models and methods used by people doing NDM research and of some of the current foci of this research.

Pliske and Klein contrast the NDM perspective with traditional approaches to decision research: NDM has not been guided by normative decision models, it has focused more on situational assessment than on the moment of choice, it has been primarily problem- (as opposed to theory-) driven, and NDM researchers have been concerned more with external than with internal validity issues. In contrast to much of the work on decision making that has emphasized how heuristics have degraded the quality of decision making, NDM researchers have tended to examine the strengths of heuristics and how experts have learned to use them to advantage. Stressing the importance of experience in judgment and decision-making performance, their studies often involve observation of experienced professionals (fire fighters, air traffic controllers, military commanders) functioning in their normal roles. The primary objective is to find ways to improve performance on real decision tasks. Pliske and Klein note, however, that, despite the emphasis on practical matters, “many of the current applications developed by NDM researchers are broadly based on cognitive and social psychological theories” and see as desirable “a clearer mapping of the links between these cognitive and social psychological theories and their applications to training and system design” (p. 580).

Whatever else the current state of theorizing in JDM is, this book makes it clear that it is not stagnant. Several new perspectives are provided by the contributors.

Drawing heavily on their own published work, Reyna, Lloyd and Brainerd offer a conception of rationality that recognizes degrees of rationality and a set of processing principles that, in their view, explain many of the findings regarding judgment and decision making that have come from the extensive work on heuristics and biases and from more recent work emphasizing the adaptive nature of reasoning processes. Specifically, they support fuzzy-trace theory ( Reyna & Brainerd, 1990 ), according to which when acquiring information about a situation of interest (e.g., a judgment or decision problem), people typically encode two types of representations, one of which preserves only gist and the other of which preserves verbatim details, and, when making judgments or decisions, they operate at the least precise level of representation the situation permits (e.g., at gist in preference to verbatim when possible). The strength of the preference for gist is assumed to grow as cognition matures.

Svenson gives an account of his differentiation and consolidation (Diff Con) theory of decision making, which is a descriptive theory that draws from both conventional decision theory and social psychology, especially as represented by the work of Festinger. According to this theory, the decision maker's basic task is to find or create a decision option that is sufficiently superior to its competitors to warrant selection. Differentiation is the process by which this is accomplished, and it involves several sub-processes, including, if necessary, restructuring of the decision problem. As a consequence of differentiation, the relative attractiveness of decision alternatives may change over time and, hopefully, one will emerge as clearly preferred to the others. Consolidation, the second component of the theory, is the process by which preference for a selected option is supported and maintained after the choice has been made. In Svenson's words, “Predecision differentiation positions the chosen alternative in as strong a position as needed or possible, and consolidation processes defend the achieved degree of superiority of the chosen alternative after the decision” (p. 318).

Svenson classifies decisions into four levels, on the basis of the amount of energy they require. At the lowest level are the countless mundane decisions that we all make every day, more or less unconsciously and by force of habit (which sock to put on first); at the highest level are decisions that require focused attention and problem solving. Most human decision making takes place at level 1, Svenson suggests, and is accomplished by such simple heuristics as doing what one has done in the same situation before (habit) or imitating what others do. Differentiation at this level tends to be holistic and not very complex. At higher levels, differentiation is more of a process and may include information seeking and restructuring of various sorts, which can effect changes in the relative attractiveness of alternatives, the importance attached to specific characteristics of the situation, and so on. Cognitive and affective components of the attractiveness of a potential decision outcome can be in conflict, and when this is the case the conflict must be resolved by differentiation. Once a decision is made, the consolidation process works to reinforce satisfaction with the choice. Svenson sees consolidation as a major reason for the creation and maintenance of habits and conservatism.

Both fuzzy-trace and Diff Con theories are dual-processing theories inasmuch as both distinguish two qualitatively different types or modes of processing. Fuzzy-trace is a dual-processing theory by virtue of its postulation of two types of encoding representations, one preserving gist and the other verbatim details. It is important to note, however, that gist and verbatim representations are seen as ends of a continuum of precision; it is assumed that people can operate all along that continuum, but when multiple representations are available, the default choice for use will be the one closest to the gist end that will get the task done. Diff Con might be considered a dual-process theory in a couple of ways: first, in distinguishing between the processes of differentiation and consolidation and, second, by recognizing the possibility that different alternatives in the same decision may be represented by aspects of different attributes and that different decision rules (one holistic with a strong affective influence and another more analytic and with less affect, for example) may be applied to those alternatives.

Other contributors to  emerging perspectives  also promote dual-process theories, although the processes identified are not the same in all cases. Dougherty, Gronlund and Gettys see promise in dual process theories of the type proposed by  Sloman (1996) , which distinguishes between an associative system and a rule-based system, the former being the more holistic and automatic and the latter more analytic and controlled. It is assumed that both systems are operative, and which one predominates in a particular decision depends on the specifics of the situation; it is not assumed that the two systems will yield the same solution in all cases.

A similar distinction is made by Haines and Moore in their summary of the findings reviewed regarding cognitive development. They note that children's performance on judgment and decision tasks is influenced by many variables, and they conclude by saying how those variables relate to the choice between more and less sophisticated reasoning techniques. “More sophisticated reasoning (and ironically, perhaps more biased reasoning under conditions that threaten existing belief systems) is likely in social and interpersonal domains, in areas of high personal relevance, in situations in which task difficulty is low and strategy-supporting cues are salient, when familiarity is high, and when peer, parent, and cultural norms motivate task engagement. On the other hand, less complex, script-based processing and heuristic use is likely when external threats to belief systems are low, social norms are prescriptive and unchallenged, task difficulty is high, and familiarity and relevance are low” (p. 276).

One answer to the question “Where is judgment and decision research heading as we forge into the 21st century?” may be seen in the directions in which research is currently going, as represented by the work of the contributors to this book; presumably most of the contributors will continue in the directions in which they are currently headed. A few explicitly identified topics they view as especially promising directions for the future. Reyna, Lloyd and Brainerd, for example, see research that explores the effects of emotion on the quality of cognition to be in this category. Haines and Moore argue that inasmuch as there is great interest in improving performance on judgment and decision making tasks, and metacognitive control is believed by many investigators to offer the best chance of realizing that goal, metacognitive control of judgment and decision making should be a major focus of future research. The ways in which goals impact decision making and the evaluation of decision outcomes should be a major focus for the future, in Schneider and Barnes's view.

A major challenge that Luce identifies is that of articulating a sufficiently deep sense of rationality to resolve what appear to be conflicting current conceptions of what constitutes rational behavior in specific choice situations. The need for predictive theories is stressed by Rettinger and Hastie, who caution that it is easy to account for decisions post hoc and that, therefore, to be tested properly any theory of decision making must be able to make predictions that can be checked after they are made. A theory that will prove adequate to deal with peoples’ real-life decision making, they argue, will presumably have to take such variables as decision makers’ personal involvement, their familiarity with the decision content domain, and emotional and moral factors into account.

Doherty begins a masterful commentary on the book with a very readable and informative recounting of the major trends in judgment and decision-making research from the 1950s to the present. Following this review, the bulk of the commentary is organized around an illuminating contrast between two opposing views, or “camps”, that have been prominent in the recent history of judgment and decision-making research and that are well represented by the contributors to this book. Using terminology credited to Jungermann, he refers to one camp as “the  optimists , or the  efficiency  camp”, and to the other as “the  pessimists , or the  deficiency  camp” (p. 648). The division became clear with the publication of work on heuristics and biases represented notably by seminal publications by Tversky, Kahneman and colleagues beginning in the early 1970s. “This research showed clearly that formal decision theoretic models were of dubious validity as descriptive models, and that there were formidable measurement difficulties to be overcome when using decision analysis prescriptively, that is, as a decision aid” (p. 649).

Members of the efficiency camp, Doherty notes, “hold the decision maker in relatively high regard” (p. 656). They tend to judge the quality of decision making in terms of  correspondence criteria  (how well decisions turn out in the real world) as opposed to  coherence criteria  (how closely the decision process adheres to the dictates of some formal normative model). Members of the deficiency camp, in contrast, have documented and emphasized many ways in which people can be shown to violate widely recognized principles of sound reasoning. Doherty lists several of what he sees as the major characteristics (tendencies, beliefs, research methods) of each camp, and he does some classifying of the chapter authors (among others) in terms of this dichotomy.

Noting that “optimists must surely recognize deficiencies” and that “pessimists must surely recognize efficiencies”, Doherty anticipates a rapprochement between the two camps. A camp of  realists , in which most researchers would probably wish to claim membership, would recognize, he surmises, some truth in both perspectives. “I believe that every researcher in the JDM fold would agree with the generalization that we humans are highly efficient at some cognitive tasks but, in the absence of the appropriate tools such as measuring instruments, paper and pencil, computers, and the like… very deficient at others. After all, these tools, including yardsticks, probability theory, calculators, and computers, were invented precisely to overcome human limitations” (p. 663).

Doherty sees great contributions to our understanding of inference, judgment, and choice coming from both camps. “The programs may seem antithetical, but it is just a matter of time before some clever graduate student starts to sort out the task characteristics that lead to adaptive cognition and those that lead to maladaptive cognition” (p. 665). He sees evidence in the chapters in this book that the conflict inherent in the two-camp scenario has started to dissipate, noting in particular the lack of negative rhetoric by the contributors. Two trends that he sees as promising of further coalescences are “the greater recognition of the importance of context and task” and “an emerging consensus that there are dual modes of thinking” (p. 665).

Regarding the latter trend, Doherty points to various ways in which chapter authors distinguish between a mode of cognitive operation that is holistic, non-deliberative and fast and one that is more analytic, deliberative and relatively slow. The rapprochement, he anticipates, will involve a dual-process theory of some sort. Doherty ends his commentary with brief remarks on seven additional themes he sees in the book (and in the JDM field more generally), and seven others that were not treated in the book and that, in his view, have been given insufficient attention by the field.

I referred to Doherty's commentary as “masterful”, and so, I think, it is. It provides a concise and clear account of the history of research on judgment and decision making, a thoughtful synopsis of the contents of the book and how they relate to two highly influential perspectives on human rationality, a good sense of the present status of research in the area, and a vision of where current trends are likely to lead. If you can manage to read only one chapter in this book, this is the chapter you should read.

Peterson et al. point out that decision theory has progressed “from modeling a limited, manageable portion of a phenomenon toward incorporating ever more ambiguity and complexity” (p. 512). Early theoretical treatments of decision making considered the problem of choice in a relatively decontextualized way. Little, if any, attention was given to the possible effects of affective or motivational variables or of the social or cultural contexts in which choices are made. As the chapters of this book attest, the situation has changed. The domain of interest has expanded considerably, ambiguity and complexity have been accepted as facts of life that studies of judgment and decision making cannot ignore, models have multiplied, and what constitutes rationality appears somewhat less certain than once was the case.

Considered individually, each of the theoretical positions presented in this volume makes a lot of sense, in my view. In the aggregate, do they constitute progress for the field? I think so—progress not necessarily in the sense of establishment of a theory of JDM that is more comprehensive and has greater predictive power than utility theory, but in the sense of revealing some of the limitations of utility theory and in calling attention to the multifaceted nature of JDM and the many variables that can affect how and why people judge and decide.

Is there convergence in the theorizing? If so, it is not obvious to me. Are there points of consensus? I think so. The inadequacy of subjective utility theory may be a case in point, at least if consensus is taken to mean wide, though not necessarily unanimous, agreement. The need for a broader conception of rationality is perhaps another, which is seen most clearly in this book by the considerable interest in dual-process theories.

Is the field poised for a major advance? It seems to me there are likely to be advances on several fronts; whether one or more will emerge as dominating, remains to be seen. My sense is that an overarching theme for some time is likely to be the need for serious rethinking of what it means to be rational, which, incidentally, appears to be perceived as a major challenge by a number of contemporary economists, philosophers and ethicists as well.

The book also prompts a number of other questions: Is there an inherent tradeoff in theory construction between quantitative precision and the ability to provide intuitively meaningful explanations of significant aspects of behavior? If so, where is JDM theory with respect to this tradeoff, and in which direction is it moving? Is theorizing becoming less quantitative? Possibly less falsifiable in principle? More commonsensical? Is there a risk of producing theories that can account for everything qualitatively, but have little predictive power? Are the findings of JDM research cumulative in the way that findings in physics and biology presumably are? Would more communication among JDM theorists produce more convergence among theories? Would that be good for the field? Or is the state of development such that convergence at this time is undesirable? Is the field sufficiently advanced to support the development of more effective judgment and decision aids than currently exist?

The editors of  emerging perspectives  have done an admirable job of compiling a collection of papers that reveal a broad spectrum of perspectives on judgment and decision making and that identify what many of the major questions deserving of research are considered by contemporary leaders in the field to be. The book is not an anthology. As far as I can tell, each chapter was written expressly for inclusion here. And the coverage is current. Of the approximately 1400 references cited, about 65% are dated 1990 or later and about 40% 1995 or later.

Emerging perspectives  is a must read, in my view, for researchers on judgment and decision making, teachers of the subject, students interested in doing research in the area, potential users of decision aids and appliers of decision theory and procedures in practical contexts. There is much here also for non-specialists who wish to be informed about what is happening in the world of JDM. Although it is not the book one would recommend as a tutorial introduction to JDM, and probably the average non-specialist is unlikely to want to read it from cover to cover, most of the chapters are relatively jargon free and should be reasonably accessible to readers with a passing acquaintance with cognitive psychology. I found it, on the whole, an extremely informative and pleasant read. My considered judgment is that a decision to read this book will be an excellent one on any reasonable criteria one wants to apply.