10.1016/j.jmp.2004.10.003
The author, William R. Uttal, is professor emeritus of psychology at the University of Michigan and professor emeritus of engineering at the Arizona State University. He received his Ph.D. in experimental psychology at the Ohio State University. He is currently writing his 23rd book. Previous books cover a range of topics in psychology, engineering, and, most recently, the philosophical foundations of psychology. Recent publications include  Psychomythics  (Erlbaum, 2003) and  Dualism: The Original Sin of Cognitivism  (Erlbaum, 2004).

The reviewer, Raymond S. Nickerson, is a former senior vice president of Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc., from which he is retired. He was the founding editor of the  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied  and is now a research professor at Tufts University, from which he received a Ph.D. in experimental psychology. Recent publications include  Psychology and environmental change  (Erlbaum, 2003) and  Cognition and chance: The psychology of probabilistic reasoning  (Erlbaum, 2004).

There can be little doubt that the questions scientists ask have often been prompted or constrained by the investigative tools at their disposal. Astronomy and biology would be impoverished sciences indeed, were it not for the invention of the optical telescope and microscope. And many discoveries had to wait until instruments were available that extended the reach of observation into the realms of the ultra distant and ultra small far beyond the reach of optical techniques. But the fact that technology enables the asking of a particular question does not, by itself, make that the right question to ask, especially if asking it consumes time, effort and other resources that could have been invested in alternate ways.

In recent years technology has produced a variety of imaging techniques that provide unprecedented noninvasive visual access to internal organs and anatomical structures. Some of them (e.g. functional magnetic resonance imaging) permit the observation of evidences of activity in specific brain areas resulting from sensory stimulation or prescribed cognitive activity of various sorts. These techniques have proved to be enormously useful to medical diagnosis and the treatment of numerous types of conditions.

It is not surprising that imaging techniques are of great interest to psychologists, especially those whose focus of research is human cognition. The neural localization of cognitive function—the mapping of particular cognitive abilities or activities onto specific brain structures or areas—is an old quest in psychology, but until recently, the techniques available to effect this mapping were very limited and much indirect reasoning and guesswork were involved. Suddenly there are techniques available that make it possible actually to look inside the black box, without opening it, and observe things going on when it is doing what it normally does. Little wonder that everyone wants to take a look.

In  The new phrenology , Uttal raises the question of whether the surge of interest in brain mapping that the development of imaging technology seems to have prompted—as witnessed by what appears to be a considerable migration from the suddenly passé realm of “cognitive psychology” to the exciting new empire of “cognitive neuroscience”—is an altogether good thing. We get a strong hint, in the preface of the book, that he thinks the answer is negative and of his intention to explain why in some detail: “The recent development of the computerized tools that permit noninvasive studies of the physiology and anatomy of the central nervous system has stimulated an enormous amount of interest and laboratory research in what has come to be called ‘cognitive neuroscience’. Much of this work on the localization of psychological functions in the brain seems to have plunged off the rock of scientific certainty into a lake of unknowns with an exuberance typical of a science suddenly provided a powerful new tool—or, perhaps, of a child given a new toy. Unfortunately, all too often inadequate attention has been paid to the conceptual, logical, and technical considerations that should accompany any scientific undertaking. It therefore falls to at least a few of us to make an extra effort to examine the situation before another exciting new technology prompts others of us to take yet another such plunge” (p. xi).

Uttal's stated goal is “to examine the definitional, conceptual, methodological, technical, and logical foundations of the extensive current efforts to localize psychological functions in the central nervous system” (p. xii). He distinguishes between the idea of a specific cognitive function being localized in a specific place in the brain and that of “one center contributing to the operation of a complex system of nodes and loci that are  collectively  responsible for the behavior” (p. 18). The latter idea he finds considerably more acceptable than the former.

He gives a brief, but very informative, review of the history of localization of brain function, noting that the widespread interest in the topic among psychologists predates the availability of powerful imaging techniques, as evidenced by citations of numerous current and classical psychobiological theories and models that identify specific functions with specific areas. Pre-imaging techniques considered include electrical stimulation of the cortex during surgery, lesion-creating or extirpation surgery, chemical deactivation of brain regions, cryogenic blocking, recording with microelectrodes—including recording from single cells—EEG and evoked potential recordings. He allows that the idea that certain areas of the brain are specialized for specific functions is not controversial—that in particular there is general agreement regarding the areas that are primarily involved in mediating sensory and motor processes. He argues, however, that “the more complex the psychological process, the less likely it is that a narrowly circumscribed region uniquely associated with that process will be found” (p. 13).

A key point that Uttal makes at the outset is that if mental functions are to be mapped onto specific brain areas, there must be clearly defined functions to be so mapped; without reasonably precise definitions of terms representing cognitive functions, mapping those functions onto brain areas is not going to be easy. So the first question that presents itself is, are there such functions: as Uttal puts it in the first paragraph of the introductory chapter: “Can psychological processes be adequately defined and isolated in a way that permits them to be associated with particular brain locales?” (p. 1). He answers the question in the negative on two counts: (1) “the empirical evidence that high-level cognitive processes are associated with widely distributed activity in many parts of the brain” (p. 25) and (2) “doubts raised about our definitions of the cognitive processes themselves” (p. 26). Thus, while he acknowledges that the brain is differentiated, he challenges the assumption that most high-level cognitive functions can be justifiably associated with specific brain locales.

The problem, he contends, is less that of identifying specialized regions in the brain than that of defining the psychological processes to be localized. “I argue that…the preeminent problem in achieving a general solution to the localization issue lies in defining the psychological processes and mechanisms for which the loci are sought” (p. 16). “Beyond the physically anchored sensory and motor processes, it has always been extremely difficult to define exactly what is meant by a psychological, cognitive, or mental term” (p. 89).

By way of an account of several of the more influential taxonomies of mental functions that have been proposed by psychologists, Uttal illustrates the difficulty psychologists have had in converging on a widely accepted classification scheme. He argues that it is an unproven assumption “that mental processes are as accessible, separable and localizable as are the material aspects of the brain” (p. 109), and that dealing with this reality is the central problem that neuroscientists face. Modern cognitive psychologists are too passive, he contends, in accepting the “twin assumptions of analyzability of mind and the intrinsic isolability of mental modules” (p. 117). Having considered and compared several systems of classification of cognitive processes, none of which has stood the test of time, he concludes that there is little reason to expect any of the current taxonomies to do so. Clearly, if one accepts this position, one's expectations for brain localization work must be very limited—as Uttal's are: “It is difficult indeed to localize a process or a function in a particular part of the brain when that process or function is so ephemeral that it does not outlast even a single generation” (p. 126).

Uttal argues further that the application of imaging techniques to the objective of localization of function is itself leading to a “proliferation of hypothetical psychological, cognitive, or mental components without a proper foundation of clear-cut answers to the questions of accessibility and analyzability” (p. 135), and is thereby perpetuating the unproven assumption that the mind is indeed divisible into distinguishable components. The seductiveness of the idea of compartmentalization and the attractiveness of the imaging technology may be making it more difficult than it otherwise would be to consider the possibility that the mind works as an integrated whole. “[I]t is possible that we are being led astray from a truer, more valid, and more realistic conceptualization of the unified nature of mental processes based on widely distributed brain mechanisms. If our search is for truth and an actual rather than a convenient or pragmatic understanding of mind and brain, then it may be necessary to consider what the alternative—an individual, composite, aggregated and unanalyzable mind—might be like” (p. 135).

Uttal concedes that there is much evidence that the brain is not homogeneous, but insists that “the corollary that our mental activity can be divided up into real (true, authentic, veridical, valid) components is not only unproven, but may not be tenable in the light of logical analysis, well-defined mathematical limits, and current empirical data. The main alternative to the analyzability hypothesis is that the proposed ‘components’ of mental activity are actually properties of some unified mind—rather than distinct entities. By implication, the modules or components of mind that have been invoked for centuries are simply manifestations of the procedures and methods used to measure behavioral functions, that is, any given mental module is a manifestation of just one of the infinitely many ways of measuring the complex, but unitary process traditionally called ‘mind’” (p. 136). “Is a taxonomy or even a lexicon of cognitive processes possible?” Uttal's answer is unequivocal: “No.”

Uttal argues too that although there is little question about the nonhomogeneity of the brain, different areas of the brain are not nearly as precisely demarcated from each other as much of the current writing on the subject suggests. Contrary to what seems to be the prevailing view, he contends, there is considerable evidence that, with the exception perhaps of sensory and motor centers, cognitive functions, simple or complex, typically involve large and distributed brain areas; the most that studies using ablation or lesion techniques have been able to establish is that specific brain areas are involved in specific processes, but they have not been able to show any area to be the locus of any particular process. “No matter how many dissociations may be concatenated to prove a point, the direction of the logical chain through which the investigator must move (i.e., from the behavioral data to the neural organization) makes it logically, conceptually, mathematically, and computationally impossible to prove the desired point—that a particular place in the brain is the critical and sufficient locus of a particular psychological process” (p. 181).

So what is the verdict about the enterprise of trying to locate mental functions in specific areas of the brain? Is this activity solid science that will provide deep insights into how the mind works, or a quixotic quest fueled by infatuation with the impressive technology of medical imaging and unwarranted assumptions about what the use of this technology could reveal about mental functioning? The burden of  The new phrenology  is to demonstrate that the question is a reasonable one to raise and in this it succeeds very well. Uttal's own answer comes much closer to the second possibility than to the first, as I understand it. As to whether he is right, I am not qualified to judge. I feel confident in asserting, however, that Uttal has very effectively articulated many of the issues that anyone who wants to take a position on the question must address.

In sum, he contests fundamental assumptions that appear to motivate much of the great and growing interest in the localization of mental functions in specific areas of the brain: that mental activity can be effectively divided into clearly distinguished components, and that the brain can be partitioned into clearly demarcated areas. “[S]upporters of localization,” he contends, “hold it as axiomatic that both the brain and the mind consist of analyzable, isolable, independent units interacting within the confines of a linear system” (p. 203). As an alternative “and perhaps more realistic” perspective, he proposes the postulation of “a complex mind–brain system instantiated as a unified entity in which the various parts interact too strongly to be isolated” (p. 204).

But suppose that the assumptions that Uttal challenges proved to be valid. And suppose further that it proved to be possible to map high-level cognitive functions onto specific brain areas—that for every psychological process or mechanism of interest the precise area or areas of the brain involved in its operation could be identified. What then? Uttal's answer is that we would still be in the dark about how it is that brain activity becomes mental activity. If one wants to learn how the brain “computes, represents, encodes, or instantiates psychological processes”, one must look to another level of analysis of brain activity, and specifically to “the details of the interactions among the neurons of the great networks of the brain, not where these networks may be located” (p. 217). Uttal contends too, however, that for reasons spelled out in the book, this goal is not likely to be achieved. He is careful to note that he is not arguing that localization research is useless—he concedes that “it has very definite contributions to make in helping us to understand which structures (among others) may be involved in certain behaviors” (p. 217)—but as to the light it is likely to shed on the question of how brain activity becomes mind activity, he sees little promise: “the entire localization issue may be an ill-posed question that is being asked at the wrong level” (p. 218).

To me, the point that localization of function is unlikely to shed light on how brain activity becomes mental activity is at least as important as any other among the several that Uttal makes. The question of how brain activity becomes mental activity is an old one among philosophers and psychologists. One variant of this question—how the activity of matter produces conscious experience—is arguably among the more perplexing riddles of science. I confess to having found this question to be compellingly intriguing for as long as I can remember, and despite considerable looking, I have yet to see anything that comes close to being a convincing answer. Would success in mapping mental functions onto brain areas explain—or help explain—this relationship?

Like Uttal, I am not convinced that it would. A better understanding of how the activity of the brain correlates with mental states would be valuable for many purposes, and is therefore a worthy objective of research. But it is far from clear how even a thorough and precise mapping of mental states onto brain states would explain how (or why) the former produce the latter. Imagine a neuroscientist, with the help of imaging technology beyond the current state of the art, observing the real-time activity of his own brain, at whatever level of detail desired, while he is observing the activity of his brain. What he would see would be fascinating indeed, and undoubtedly revealing in many respects; but would it reveal why the activity necessarily is accompanied by the conscious experience? I find it hard to believe that it would.

In the final chapter of his book, Uttal summarizes the arguments presented in the preceding chapters. He lists 29 implicit and explicit assumptions that he considers to underlie localization research, and 36 counter assumptions that represent what he refers to as a behaviorist view. Not surprisingly, he considers many of the assumptions underlying localization research to be controversial if not demonstrably wrong. The assumptions underlying the behaviorist view come closer to representing his own position. One of the latter (#34) more or less summarizes much of his criticism of localization research: “Given the complexities of the scanning methods and the lack of constraints on hypothesizing cognitive components, any cognitive process that can be named, no matter how outlandish, can be localized in a brain region—if sought” (p. 217). While he notes that “the older classical versions of behaviorism were disappointing and inadequate to many of us”, he expresses the belief “that some of the fundamental premises of the behaviorist approach to the study of psychological activity merit review and, perhaps, readoption” (p. 206).

He notes too the noisiness of imaging data, due in part to the variability in the functional organization and anatomy of individual brains, which may be obscured by averaging and other data analysis techniques. He contends that theorists have sometimes drawn conclusions about the localization of function that essentially overlook such considerations, even when that means ignoring some of their own data. His judgment of this state of affairs is harsh: “Obviously, the seductive simplicity of the approach has won the day, pushing aside logic and even data, with many of the resulting theories driven more by hopeful expectations than by the findings and observations” (p. 200).

Who should read  The new phrenology ? Certainly anyone doing, or contemplating doing, research on localization of function in the brain should read it. One may take issue with Uttal's statements of the various assumptions that underlie localization work and his criticisms of some of the approaches used, especially those involving application of modern imaging technology, but one is ill-advised to ignore them. More generally, anyone interested in the venerable question of how brain activity relates to (correlates with, corresponds to, produces) mental activity should read it as well. The book has a wealth of information, and it clearly reveals many of the difficulties involved in matching brain function with mentation.

Uttal is a thoughtful and thought-provoking writer. He asks insightful questions—takes nothing for granted—and proposes reasoned answers. He does not shun controversy, and he makes his own position on controversial topics clear. He describes his ambition, in this book as in some earlier ones, as that of being not an iconoclast but a constructive gadfly. In my view, he has succeeded exceptionally well in realizing this objective.  The new phrenology  should prove to be of great interest both to committed localizers and to those whose focus of attention is on aspects of cognition that are independent of what areas of the brain may mediate them.