10.1016/j.jmp.2005.06.007
The challenging subject of this note was assigned to me by the editors of this Festschrift. In fact, the first issue of the Journal of Mathematical Psychology (or JMP) appeared exactly 40 years ago, and this anniversary is a good occasion for a reflection on the field. Dick Atkinson was the first editor of the journal. He remained in that position until 1971, when Keith Smith took over, followed by Bill Batchelder and others. In addition to Dick Atkinson, the members of the initial editorial board were Bob Bush, Clyde Coombs, Bill Estes, Duncan Luce, Bill McGill, George Miller and Pat Suppes. Note that, with one exception, 
                         1 
                      
                      
                         1 
                         Pat Suppes was professor of philosophy and statistics at Stanford University. However, his publications in psychology journals were at that time already numerous. 
                       all of them had teaching positions in psychology departments. The evolution of the content of the JMP over the years is revealing. I have prepared a table ( Table 1 
                      ) and a graph that I think that the reader may find interesting. The table displays, for each five-year period since 1964, the number of papers published in each of the main content areas ( Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964–2004 ).

Before studying this table, one obvious caveat is in order: the classification of a paper in one of the 13 areas in the first column unavoidably involved some arbitrariness. Every so often, a given paper could placed, for example, in “Cognition” or in “Artificial Intelligence.” This was the case for the papers dealing with “Knowledge Spaces” which were all placed in “Cognition.” As I was only seeking general trends, occasional misclassifications were not so critical.

Examining the lines of this table from the bottom up, one first sees that the last seven areas (including “others”) have only a scant representation. We shall ignore them in the sequel. The second area, “Concept Formation” (which includes “Concept Identification”), is also poorly represented. However, it makes sense to combine this area with the first one, “Learning.” It is also fitting to put together “Measurement Theory”, “Mathematics and Methodology” and “Statistics” because papers in those areas are mostly concerned with the mathematical or logical aspects of models rather than their empirical import. The number of papers in “Memory, Cognition and Human Information Processing” is relatively small and we also omit this category. 
                         2 
                      
                      
                         2 
                         Actually, in the latter part of that line of the table, these numbers are somewhat artificially inflated because, as mentioned earlier, I have included there the papers dealing with knowledge spaces theory, which typically involve combinatoric techniques and results. All these papers could have been put in “Artificial Intelligence” or in “Mathematics, Statistics and Methodology.”

We end up with four categories giving a streamlined picture of the evolution of the field between 1964 and 2004, a graphic display of which is given in  Fig. 1 
                      . For each of the eight periods from 1964–1969 to 2000–2004,  Fig. 1  gives the percentage of papers in each of the four categories (to which I refer by a shorthand title for convenience):

Learning : Learning and Concepts Formation and Identification.

Methodology : Mathematics, Statistics, Methodology and Measurement.

Choices : Games, Choices, Utility and Decisions.

Perception : Perception and Psychophysics.

The most striking observation is that “Learning”, which dominates the content of the JMP between 1964 and 1974, practically disappears from the journal after that. This does not mean that learning theory has ceased to be of interest as a subject of scientific inquiry. For example, machine learning is a well-known, very active subfield of research in Artificial Intelligence. A recent issue of the  Journal of Machine Learning and Research  (JMLR, 2004) was entirely devoted to learning theory (see  Blum, Jackson, Sandholm, & Zinkevich, 2004; Cortes, Haffner, & Mohri, 2004; Jebara, Kondor, & Howard, 2004; Mannor & Tsitsiklis, 2004; von Luxburg & Bousquet, 2004; Vovk, 2004 ). This topic is also of interest to economists, with many papers on learning appearing in the journal  Experimental Economics . The fact is, however, that learning theory, which was for decades one of the major areas of experimental psychology (see any classic textbook, such as  Hilgard & Bower, 1966 ), is no longer actively pursued by mathematical psychologists today.

Turning to “Methodology”, we see that after a slow start between 1964 and 1969, it ends up providing the majority of the papers published after 1974, ending up in 2000–2004 with more than 50% of the contributions. The percentages in the two remaining categories, “Choices” and “Perception”, are stable and hover around 15%. Incidentally, many of the papers classified under “Choices” deal with micro-economics and are written by mathematical economists.

There are reasons for concern in the trend suggested by  Fig. 1 , especially in the context of the evolution of the mathematical and scientific education of psychologists not only in the US but worldwide. One, rather grim, interpretation of this figure is as follows. Mathematical psychology emerged as an independent field of research around 1955 in the midst of a long, heated controversy about the mechanisms of learning. The main cleavage was between the stimulus-response theorists, a category illustrated by Pavlov, Thorndike, Guthrie, Hull and Skinner, and the cognitive theorists such as Tolman, the precursor of the modern era. On hindsight, a key reason for the dispute can perhaps be found in the ambiguities of the language in which the respective theories were expressed.

The contribution of mathematical psychology was the clarification of some of the issues. With relatively simple mathematical models, it tried to make sense of the mass of human and animal learning data collected by experimental psychologists over decades of laboratory work. Mathematical psychologists also performed learning experiments focusing on such models, which were at first astonishingly successful and generated much interest in the community of experimental psychologists. Mathematical psychology became a respected research area, an integral part of scientific psychology, deemed to play for psychology a role similar to that of mathematical physics for that other science. After a while, however, problems arose not only because the mathematical models generated their own controversies, but also, and much more importantly, because—at least for human subjects—a careful look at learning data of carefully designed experiments revealed that matters were considerably more complicated than people thought, and substantially beyond the reach of the current models. An important, but strangely enough, rarely cited paper by  Yellott (1969)  may very well have been the last straw. 
                         3 
                      
                      
                         3 
                         He used the ingenious experimental design of systematically reinforcing positively the subjects responses—whatever they were—after an initial learning period. This revealed that most subjects, rather than responding randomly, were testing one or the other of a large collection of lawful strategies, thereby showing that the basic assumptions of the stochastic learning models were fundamentally faulty.

Many mathematical learning theorists were caught unprepared for such difficulties and, essentially, left the field. To explain such an exodus, it is sometimes argued that, because of the work published in the JMP, the use of mathematical techniques had gained acceptance in the psychological research community at large, and that papers that would formerly have been published in the JMP would now find place in a standard journal. I find that argument highly dubious because it conflicts with the common observation that the education of psychology majors is today considerably less mathematical or scientific than it used to be 30 or 40 years ago. I will elaborate that point later on. In any event, what was left of our field as far as the JMP is concerned were the parts that were already quite technical, such as measurement theory, the mathematics of psychophysics and the theory of choice which, as mentioned earlier, was largely investigated by researchers outside of psychology. In other words, mathematical psychology became a “niche” topic. With some exceptions, such as psychophysics, the papers published in the JMP became technically—rather than substantively—oriented, often authored by outsiders, such as mathematicians or economists.

About at the same time, the mathematical education (and also, in some cases, the scientific education) of psychology majors began to decline. Admittedly, the evidence for such a decline is anecdotical. But the anecdotes are frequent and widespread. Let me give you some indicators.

At the Free University of Brussels (ULB), where I was trained in the fifties and where I spent the first six months of 2004 (in the mathematics department, interestingly), the first undergraduate year in psychology used to contain courses in physics, chemistry, organic chemistry, calculus, biology, philosophy (including logic). There were just two psychology courses. Today, calculus and physics have been dropped. I asked some former students of mine, who are now teaching there, why that happened. The answer was that psychology attracts many students for whom the inclusion of calculus and physics in their curriculum would yield unacceptable failure rates.

For another example: nowadays, elementary statistics book written for psychology students rarely contain more than a cursory introduction to probability theory. With such a lack of background, undergraduate students cannot be given even the most elementary presentation of quantitative psychological theory, including topics such as the statistical testing of mathematical models. 
                         4 
                      
                      
                         4 
                         Elementary statistics, including the Analysis of Variance, does not qualify. In the large majority of psychological applications, the model tested is typically a straw man, the rejection of which is intended to bolster some psychological theory which is stated informally.

Still another example: mathematical psychology has been dropped as a subfield of research at the University of Nijmegen, which used to be a major European center in the subject.

What seems to be happening is that the dumbing down of basic education everywhere has transformed psychology into a soft academic landing for weak students. Certainly, there are exceptions to this trend, in the guise of great departments attracting talented students. But I believe the phenomenon to be prevalent. A consequence of that evolution is that the best graduate students that quantitatively oriented psychology departments can recruit are typically those with an undergraduate major outside of psychology, such as mathematics, physics, computer science or biology. Such a state of affairs is not a healthy sign for a scientific discipline.

Another consequence of that evolution is that the most difficult and interesting problems that should normally, in view of its history, be in the province of psychology tend to be taken over by computer science, neuro science or engineering. Computer science, whose students are better equipped to deal with technically difficult problems, is especially greedy in that respect. And maybe that is fine—why should we care about who tackles the problems provided that somebody competent does?—except for one thing. Experimental psychology has, over its already long history, collected a large mass of important data and concepts, which are described in undergraduate courses but are typically unknown outside of psychology, say by computer scientists or economists. Presumably, such accumulated wisdom would have to be painfully rediscovered.

In some rare cases where the accidental collection of faculty forming a given department is suitable and dynamic enough, one can try to stem what can only be seen as the degradation of undergraduate education in psychology. For the field as a whole, however, probably not much can be expected. Besides, the evolution that we are witnessing may be part of a broad phenomenon. Three centuries ago, there was only one discipline: philosophy, and all the scholars were writing in Latin. The academic title “Ph.D.” is a token remnant of those times. Gradually, one after the other, beginning with physics and mathematics, the sciences detached themselves from the mother discipline. In the case of psychology, which by nature is much closer to philosophy, we may just be witnessing a difficult separation, right down the middle, between part of the discipline migrating to other, more “scientific” fields, and the rest rejecting such a move. Two proposals come to mind, the implementation of which may be helpful: 
                         
                            1. 
                            Joining with other departments in the creation of combined graduate programs, such as  cognitive computational sciences  or  psychological economics . 
                         
                         
                            2. 
                            Refocus the field of mathematical psychology by concocting an ambitious list of major unsolved problems.

Joining with other departments in the creation of combined graduate programs, such as  cognitive computational sciences  or  psychological economics .

Refocus the field of mathematical psychology by concocting an ambitious list of major unsolved problems.

As I wanted to finish this piece on a positive note, I have asked a few researchers who I knew or suspected were sharing my concerns to propose such open problem. A few of them have assented and their problems follow this article.

I am grateful to Duncan Luce, Geoff Iverson and Jack Yellott for their reactions to a previous draft of this paper.