10.1016/j.jmp.2005.02.002
Douglas Vickers died suddenly in his home in Adelaide, South Australia, on October 31, 2004. At the time of his death he was professor of psychology at the University of Adelaide and director of the Adelaide Cognition and Applied Decision Making Unit, a research group he had worked assiduously to develop and promote during the preceding years. With his death, Australian psychology lost one of its leading researchers in psychophysics and decision making and one of its most creative theorists. At a memorial service in Adelaide he was eulogized by his boyhood friend, Alex Millar, his longtime friend and former colleague, Don McNicol, and his former student and current colleague, Michael Lee.

Vickers grew up in Dunbar, a small town in the east of Scotland. He was remembered by Alex during those years for his philosophical bent, his methodical approach to practical and intellectual matters, his dislike of organized sport, and his ambition to study at Cambridge University. Such a thing was virtually unheard of in the rural Scotland of Vickers’ youth and was deemed singular and remarkable by his boyhood friends. Nevertheless, he realized this ambition, graduating with a B.A. in natural sciences from Cambridge in 1963, after first completing an M.A. with honors in mental philosophy at the University of Edinburgh in 1961.

While at Cambridge, Vickers was exposed to the work of Alan Welford, one of the towering figures of Anglo-Australian psychology, the originator of single-channel theory, and one of the pioneers in the use of cognitive methods in the analysis of aging and human skill. Under Welford's supervision, Vickers completed a Ph.D. in experimental psychology in 1967, in which he investigated two topics that would be among his lifelong interests: human decision processes and perceptual organization. While a graduate student at Cambridge he also formed an enduring friendship with Don McNicol, who would later be known to a generation of Australian psychology students for his textbook on signal detection theory.

When Welford was persuaded to take up a specially created chair at the University of Adelaide in 1968, two of his first recruits were the new graduates Vickers and McNicol. Under Welford's leadership, Adelaide grew into a flourishing department of experimental psychology, with a national and international reputation in the study in human information processing, decision making, and response times. Welford's 1980 edited volume  Reaction Times , featuring a chapter on discrimination by Vickers, provides a vivid snapshot of the state of Adelaide psychology during those years. Whereas McNicol soon moved on to other universities and to a career in university administration, Vickers remained at the University of Adelaide for the remainder of his life, where he successively held appointments as lecturer, senior lecturer, reader, and professor. During these years, among his many contributions to psychology, he supervised around 40 honors students and 15 Ph.D. students, many of whom now occupy faculty positions in psychology departments around Australia.

Vickers’ work during his early years at Adelaide included papers on perceptual alternation, depth perception, individual differences, and decision making. Among them, in 1971, was “Evidence for an Accumulator Model of Psychophysical Discrimination,” the first statement of the model that would subsequently be associated with his name. This model was a generalization of an earlier decision model, advocated by LaBerge in the United States and Audley and Pike in the UK, in which evidence for competing responses is accumulated in separate evidence totals in discrete time and unit pieces. Vickers argued that better response time distribution properties could be obtained if one assumed that the increments to the accumulators were of variable rather than of fixed size, and showed that the resulting model provided a good account of many of the key empirical data. He remained a passionate advocate of this model throughout his life, despite the competing claims of the more widely known and influential random walk models.

His championing of accumulator models was based, in part, on his belief that they provided a better account than random walks of subjective confidence. Whereas random walks and accumulators both provide accounts of the relationship between response time and accuracy, Vickers viewed confidence as a “Cinderella variable,” whose importance was often overlooked in the face of the louder claims of the ugly step-sisters, response time and accuracy. As response time, accuracy, and confidence each vary systematically with experimental conditions, his view was that a good decision model should describe the relationships among them all. He provided an account of these relationships with his elegant “balance of evidence” theory of response confidence, in which confidence is identified with the difference in the two accumulated evidence totals at the time the response is made. His ideas about confidence and decision making, which matured throughout the 1970s, were systematically developed in his 1979 monograph,  Decision Processes in Visual Perception .

Perhaps his finest achievement was a theory of perceptual self-regulation, published in 1978, which explains how decision criteria dynamically adapt to changes in prevailing stimulus conditions. This theory grew out of his theoretical and empirical work on confidence and from his belief that the central nervous system is organized as a hierarchy of adaptive control. In this theory, confidence is given a central role, as a regulating variable. Vickers’ idea was that people attempt to make their decisions, on average, with a certain target level of confidence. To do so, they keep track of whether the actual confidence on any trial is greater or less than the target level, and use it to set their decision criteria. They do this by accumulating the discrepancies between the actual and the target confidence over trials, in the same way as they are assumed to accumulate evidence over time to make a decision. Adaptive criterion shifts are made intermittently, whenever a critical amount of underconfidence or overconfidence is accumulated. Underconfidence causes criteria to increase; overconfidence causes them to decrease. By using confidence to regulate performance in this way, the system can adapt its decision criteria to changing stimulus conditions, optimizing speed and accuracy.

My first real encounter with Vickers was as an honors student in 1977, when I signed up for what was described as a research project on “consciousness.” Unlike the other projects on offer that year, this one sounded like it would offer real traction on the big picture, at least as I dimly conceived it. What I found myself actually doing was a study of people's subjective ratings of changes in their response bias in a two-choice decision task, as the relative event frequencies altered. This was not wholly misleading advertising, however, as it accorded with Vickers’ conception of the role of consciousness within the central nervous system. This role, which on my better days I believed I understood, was encapsulated in his assertion that “consciousness corresponds to the highest level of adaptive control in the system, tagged for the locus of its operation.” The significance of this formulation was its attempt to link the functional aspects of consciousness with what philosophers would call its “qualia,” that is, its subjective or phenomenal aspects. Vickers’ view of the nervous system as a hierarchy of adaptive control underlay his deepest and most prescient contributions to cognitive theory.

In 1989, he and I collaborated on a paper on the expanded judgment task, a task derived from the work of Ward Edwards, in which decisions are made about consecutively presented sequences of discrete elements. Understanding this task was a lifelong interest for Vickers, and it forms the subject of many of his published papers. For him, the appeal and fascination of this task were that, in it, the sequence of observations that drives the decision process is neither unobserved nor hypothetical, as it is in most choice response time tasks, but is explicit and under direct experimental control. Under these circumstances, he reasoned, it should be possible to predict not merely average or aggregate performance, but performance on individual trials. In our paper, we compared a number of models and showed our data were well described by a generalization of the accumulator model, with magnitude-dependent information loss. At the time, I was rather pleased with this paper. Our generalized accumulator model accounted successfully for the response time distributions for each of our experimental subjects, the proportions of correct responses, and the relationship between the response times for correct responses and errors. What more could anybody want?

Vickers, however, remained dissatisfied with what we had achieved and continued to pursue the grail of predicting performance on individual trials. This culminated in an enormous paper with Anthony Pietsch in 1997, in which they evaluated a vast number of traditional and nontraditional decision models. They did so by the simple but powerful expedient of presenting a model with exactly the same sequences of stimulus elements as they presented to their experimental subjects, and then correlating the trial-by-trial performance of the subjects and the model. As a result, they rejected all traditional sequential sampling models and argued instead for what they called a “loose capacity” model, in which runs of identical stimulus elements are encoded as chunks and stored in short-term memory. In this model, which integrates perception, memory, and decision making, chunks of information in memory are randomly overwritten by new chunks, until such times as the contents of memory become sufficiently homogeneous to favor one or the other response.

Although he was best known for his work on perceptual decision mechanisms, Vickers’ range of intellectual interests was extensive, and encompassed practical, theoretical, and philosophical questions. In 1972, he initiated, with Ted Nettelbeck and Bob Willson, a branch of individual differences research with the development of the inspection time index. The idea of inspection time grew out of the assumption, made by the sequential sampling decision models of that era, that stimulus information is sampled and accumulated in discrete time. This assumption was made partly for mathematical convenience, but also owed something to the then-current “perceptual moment” ideas of Stroud. Attempts by Vickers and his colleagues to estimate the sampling time empirically led them to define inspection time as the minimum exposure duration needed to identify a highly discriminable, backwardly masked stimulus. They interpreted this time as the time needed to accumulate a single perceptual sample. The discovery that inspection time correlated moderately with IQ led to the view that it provides a low-level measure of generalized mental speed, and to its widespread, if controversial, adoption as test of this kind. Vickers himself never made the kinds of claims for inspection time that were made by its more enthusiastic proponents, but he retained a lifelong interest in individual differences issues. One of the byproducts of this interest was his development, in the early 1990s, of the FAST index, a perceptual test of postoperative recovery from anesthesia, based on the expanded judgment task.

In his later years at Adelaide, Vickers was actively engaged in a variety of projects, including an  
                      n 
                   -alternative generalization of the adaptive accumulator model, a study of human performance on path-following and traveling-salesman problems, and a “generative transformational” study of perceptual organization and structure. This last project was inspired by the Erlangen Program of Felix Klein, for whom geometry was the study of the invariants of spatial transformation groups. In a similar manner, Vickers viewed the task of extracting perceptual structure from an image as one of identifying features of the optical array that remain invariant under transformation. In 2003, he described this approach to the identification of perceptual structure in a Purdue Winer Memorial Lecture, at Purdue University. At the time of his death in 2004 he had just completed a term as the president of International Society for Psychophysics and was due to host the society's annual meeting in Adelaide in 2005.

Vickers was an ardent Francophile, having married Yvonne Victoria Jouty, from the Savoie region of France, in Cambridge in 1965. For him, the warmth, color, and sophisticated cuisine of France were an antidote to the bleak climate and indifferent cooking of his Scottish boyhood. Throughout his professional life, he maintained strong links with researchers in France and sojourned there extensively whenever he could. During this time, he and Yvonne devoted considerable effort to the progressive restoration of an old house in the Savoie district, where they planned to retire.

Those of us who studied with Douglas remember him for his unaffected, good-humored manner and the inspiring, imaginative reach of his scholarship. Those of us who also knew him as a friend have many memories. Best among them are dinners on summer nights under the grapevine on the terrace at his home in Adelaide. Those nights were filled with warmth, wit, wine, and good company, assembled around the centerpiece of Yvonne's regional French cuisine. Such things are irreplaceable.

Douglas is survived by his wife, Yvonne, their children Anne and Marc, and their six grandchildren.