10.1016/j.jmp.2005.10.001
The author, Louis E. Narens, is a mathematical psychologist who is currently a Professor of Cognitive Science at the University of California, Irvine, where he had been since 1979. He received his Ph.D. in 1970 from the University of California, Los Angeles. Narens’ publications range over several important areas of research in the behavioral and social sciences, especially the theory of measurement. His 1985 book  Abstract Measurement Theory  and the current one being reviewed are fundamental contributions to the field. He received the outstanding paper award for 2000–2002 from the Journal of Mathematical Psychology.

The reviewer, Patrick Suppes, is the Lucie Stern Professor of Philosophy Emeritus at Stanford University and is Director and Faculty Advisor of Stanford's Education Program for Gifted Youth. He received his Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1950, and has been at Stanford since then. He has published widely in philosophy, psychology, and education.

This is a fascinating book, bound to be of much interest to the readership of this journal. The book provides the most extensive and detailed exposition of the concept of meaningfulness to be found in the literature. Moreover, it does not concentrate on geometry and physics, classical subjects for the analysis of meaningfulness and invariance, but focuses on the behavioral sciences and the foundations of measurement. If this journal is concentrated in one area, it is certainly the theory of measurement and scaling, so Narens has written this book above all for mathematical psychologists. There is something new in it for each of us.

The other salient point is that the analysis of meaningfulness given by Narens starts deep within the foundational literature of mathematics itself. There is wide agreement these days that, in spite of some well-known limitations, standard mathematics can be axiomatized and organized conceptually using the ZFC axioms for set theory—Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms plus the axiom of choice.  Zermelo (1908)  sets forth the standard axioms, with one exception, this is Zermelo's axiom of separation: given a set  A , then for any formula  f ( x ), the subset of  A  consisting of the  x’ s that satisfy  f  exists. Zermelo's original formulation of this axiom was in terms of the informal concept of a  definite  statement or formula, which was formalized satisfactorily by  Skolem (1922) . In the same year,  Fraenkel (1922)  showed that the axiom of separation had to be strengthened to the axiom of replacement to prove the existence of all the intuitively natural sets. This new axiom is needed to prove fundamental theorems about transfinite induction and ordinal arithmetic. Intuitively, the axiom says that if we have a formula  f ( x ,  y ) with the functional property that for every  x  in a set  A  there is at most one  y  such that  f(x, y) , then we may assert that the set of  y’ s exists, and “replace”  A  by this new set. I discuss the axiom of choice later.

What I have just described about ZFC was all well understood before the middle of the twentieth century. Narens’ original contribution is to add to the primitive concept of set membership of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, the concept of meaningfulness, denoted by ‘M’. To permit the analysis of meaningfulness of more than sets, Narens also admits into his framework the existence of atoms, which are not sets. This was also part of  Zermelo's  original 1908 formulation, but such atoms are often included in various more recent formulations of ZFC. So the atoms are not new, but the meaningful concept certainly is. I emphasize again the special character of the development being mainly concentrated on concepts of measurement and scaling in the behavioral sciences, with some useful forays into mathematics and physics, and also beginning with a very general treatment of the foundations of mathematics.

I now turn to a systematic survey of the contents. Since so much different ground is covered, comments and criticisms, if any, are given at the end of the summary of each chapter. I reserve some general comments to the end.

Chapter  1. This chapter is introductory and historical. In the first three sections a great deal of standard historical material, especially on foundations of science and mathematics, is covered quickly, with interesting side remarks along the way. Section 4 is on invariance in geometry. The treatment is informal and general, with a concentration, not unexpectedly, on Felix Klein's nineteenth-century Erlangen program stressing the importance of transformations in geometry and what they leave invariant. Section 5 is an introduction to dimensional analysis, which is brought in at a number of places in later chapters. The next two sections are on various number concepts and a sketch of their history. The last section is on the conceptual problems that surfaced in the nineteenth century with the introduction of Cantor's concept of actual infinity.

Chapter  2. This chapter surveys, now in much more technical detail, various intuitive theories of meaningfulness. Let me mention the topics, familiar in some form to most readers of this journal: Stevens’ theory of scales, Luce's possible psychophysical laws, Falmagne's and Narens’ meaningful quantitative laws, and Roberts’ and Rosenbaum's possible psychophysical laws. I stress that this is not just a survey of these well-known matters. Narens has many useful and penetrating remarks to make along the way. He returns in Chapter 6 to his own current views in the section entitled “Lawfulness.” Chapter 2 ends with two nice applications, one to the problem of combining data from different judges or raters, as in athletic competitions such as diving, and the other to a psychophysics example using the apparatus introduced by  Falmagne and Narens (1983) .

Comment . The next chapter moves back to the generality of axiomatic set theory. Just listing the topics, this seems like a peculiar zigzag, but, as Narens’ explains at the beginning of the first example, Chapters 1 and 2 cover historical background and many intuitive examples of meaningfulness. I think it was a wise decision to begin this way. If Chapter 3 had been made the first chapter with detail, immediately after Chapter 1, many behavioral scientists would not have “stood still” to get through the introduction of cardinal and ordinal numbers and the like to get to some topics of direct interest to them. Chapter 2 nicely fills the need of getting “down to business” rather early, but in a not-too-difficult way.

Chapter  3. This chapter is on axiomatic set theory and is the place in the book where Narens formulates in technical detail the very general set-theoretical framework of his theory of meaningfulness. Beyond his version of the standard Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms, he covers the algebra of sets, relations, functions and Cartesian products, with a rapid overview of ordering relations, ordinal numbers and cardinal numbers.

Comment . The chapter is short, consisting of just more than 20 pages. But a longer development would have been out of place. Parts of the chapter are too densely written to be of much use for readers not already familiar with the concepts being developed. This is true, for example, of the definitions and theorems on transfinite induction and transfinite recursion, which are used in some of the proofs in Chapter 4. In any case, the chapter is a useful reference for a quick overview of the foundations with which Narens begins. Inevitably, readers who need or want a more detailed and leisurely development must look to one of the standard texts entirely devoted to general set theory.

Chapter  4. This chapter is on meaningfulness characterized first in terms of transformations and then generalized to a definitional approach. The chapter is, in many ways, the axiomatic heart of the book. It is more than 70 pages long, full of original ideas and interesting comments, along with substantial formal and technical analysis. Section 1 is on the formalization of the language of meaningfulness. Here Narens augments standard set theory with the primitive predicate ‘M’ for meaningful. Section 4.2 uses the apparatus introduced in the preceding section to develop formally the transformational approach to meaningfulness, first introduced in a much less formal or systematic way by Klein in the nineteenth century, as mentioned earlier. Section 4.3, one of the most important systematic sections in the book, follows with an axiomatic focus on definitional generalizations of Klein's geometric program. It is important to note that the transformational and definitional approaches to meaningfulness are not in opposition. Rather, the definitional one takes over when the only automorphism, i.e., transformation that has the proper invariance property, is the trivial automorphism of identity, i.e., the one mapping each object into itself.

Five different but closely related sets of axioms are given. The last part of the section is then devoted to theorems showing how these five systems are formally related, mainly in terms of logical implications. Section 4.4 is devoted to generalizations of Klein's program to families of transformation groups. The principal result is that these generalizations are shown to be equivalent to various axiom systems characterized in Section 4.3. The intent of Section 4.5 is to present a sample of consequences of the axiom systems of Section 4.3, in order to give the reader a quick overview of some significant applications. The first one characterizes the concept of homogeneity for relational structures, the second meaningful cardinal numbers, and the third Narens’ axioms for meaningful set theory. Section 4.6 serves the useful purpose of showing what can be done, in some ways in simpler fashion, to characterize meaningfulness by using second-order logic—intuitively this means quantifying over predicates, which is not possible in first-order logic. Narens’ point is that second-order logic can provide a simpler approach in several respects in comparison with a strong set-theoretical one. Section 4.7 develops a variety of additional approaches to invariance and definability by weakening or changing various of the axiom systems introduced. The final paragraphs sketch informally the possible use of infinitary languages and logic, a topic much developed in mathematical logic, but not much explored elsewhere, even in pure mathematics. Section 4.8 is a very readable philosophical appraisal of what has been accomplished thus far. Narens nicely summarizes here the strengths and weakness of both the definable approach to meaningfulness, i.e., a concept or set is meaningful if it is defined in terms of primitive meaningful objects, and the invariance or transformational approach that originated with Klein. Like the various axiom systems considered, the discussion here is subtle and too nuanced to summarize appropriately. It is one of the best places in the book to get Narens’ own appraisal of what he has accomplished. This long chapter has two more sections, beyond this concluding one. Section 4.9 summarizes the axioms and axiom systems introduced, and Section 10 consists of more than 20 pages of additional proofs and results.

Comment . Many readers of the  Journal of Mathematical Psychology  will find these first four chapters heavy going, because of the intricacies of the several possible axiom systems introduced by Narens, which are variants of earlier well-known axioms for set theory, but which are not widely taught, even to pure mathematicians. On the other hand, the intuitive ideas are clear, and at various points well characterized in an informal way by Narens. So I urge those who want to see the payoff, so to speak, in scientific applications, to not give up, skim lightly if need be these early chapters, and then concentrate on Chapters 5, 6, and 7, which contain the interesting psychological and physical applications anticipated at the beginning of the book.

Chapter  5. A detailed presentation of the representational theory of measurement, with many topics besides meaningfulness receiving a full treatment, is given in this chapter. At a length of over 100 pages, it is the longest chapter in the book. Following a brief introductory section, Section 5.2 presents two closely related views of the theory of measurement representations, one formulated in terms of homomorphisms and the other in terms of isomorphisms, with the latter preferred by Narens, but the differences are not large enough to examine in detail here. Section 5.3 reviews the more prominent criticisms of the representational approach to measurement, especially those of Adams, Nideree, and Michell. Narens agrees with their shared view that there are missing essential, or at least highly desirable, elements of measurement practice not included in the representational approach and that there are alternative generalizations for which numbers are not necessary. These criticisms are by now widely known and appreciated by measurement aficionados, including myself; so I will not comment on them directly, but consider them later in connection with Narens’ detailed development of meaningful concepts for measurement in this chapter in Sections 5.5 and 5.6. But first there is the consideration of continuous measurement structures in Section 5.4. I liked this section a lot. It is full of developments and interesting remarks. It is for such continuous structures that Narens has proved some of his most significant theorems in the theory of measurement. For example, what he defines as a continuous scalar structure, roughly speaking, a relational structure that is completely ordered, is dense and has the properties Narens has much studied, namely, 1-point homogeneousness and 1-point uniqueness, is shown to have a ratio-scale representation. The many other structures studied in this section are presented in too much detail to summarize here. But I will comment later on Narens’ view of the importance of such continuous structures for general measurement theory.

Section 5.5 is probably the best detailed presentation anywhere of the view of meaningfulness that comes out of the representational theory of measurement, and reflects Narens’ many years of work on the concept. I shall not repeat here the familiar definitions in the literature, but rather concentrate on some of Narens’ critical remarks. First, here and earlier, he has emphasized that invariance under transformations that preserve the qualitative properties of the given relational structure is not sufficient for meaningfulness, and that definability also enter into the analysis of meaning. Good examples are systems of qualitative axioms for probability for which there is only the trivial automorphism of identity. This does not permit us to claim that every formula of the qualitative language is meaningful. Second, Narens has some other examples to show that the concept of meaningfulness can be equivocal for qualitative structures that do not have unique Dedekind completeness. These and some related comments raise the interesting question of which direction measurement theory should move. Narens prefers the simplicity and beauty of continuous structures with unique Dedekind completeness, which have natural mathematical appeal. The argument in the other direction is for greater scientific fidelity to assumptions that can be supported by experimental data. Generally, continuity is an example that cannot. The modern physical view of space and time does not well support continuity, but discreteness. Moreover, a majority of psychological experiments, in my judgment, are essentially discrete in terms of the variables observed. Narens is aware of this problem, and presents this issue in several places in an evenhanded way.

The remainder of Chapter 5 has some of the best material in the book. There are separate sections on possible psychophysical laws, magnitude estimation, Weber's law, and dimensional analysis. There is no space here to review them in detail, but only to recommend them.

The last three chapters cover more specialized subjects. I will not comment on them in detail, even though they are full of many informative and subtle formal remarks.

Chapter  6. The focus is on intrinsicness, which is not a familiar mathematical notion, but is given a technical meaning by Narens. It is not easy to summarize in a few words his definition. The intuitive idea is that intrinsicness is used as an additional concept when meaningfulness provides a necessary but not sufficient condition, for example, for lawfulness. Intrinsicness is used particularly in dealing with systems of measurement that have as the only automorphism the trivial identity one. The concept is also used in this chapter in the treatment of psychophysical laws. Roughly speaking, Narens’ fundamental idea is to add, in the trivial-automorphism case, an additional invariance requirement, which is then said to be “intrinsic.” In the psychophysical case, the added content is to yield intrinsic laws that, in their formulation, do not depend on a specific choice of primitive concepts.

Chapter  7. “Qualitativeness”, which is also a concept that is usually not given a definite mathematical meaning, is the concern of the chapter. The technical meaning that Narens assigns to this concept is similar to that of intrinsicness, i.e., it is viewed as a special meaningfulness concept. The key technical restriction is to use very little pure mathematics in formalizing an empirical system to belong to the meaningfulness part of the scientific topic under investigation. To philosophers, the program for qualitativeness is reminiscent of various epistemological programs of the past, such as those of Carnap or Bertrand Russell. These programs are often described as constructions of the objective world from sense data.

Chapter  8. In this final chapter, the focus is on meaningfulness and the axiom of choice, a topic close to the foundations of mathematics, and is the shortest chapter in the book. The first part reviews the history of the status of the axiom of choice in mathematics. The last part is a brief, highly readable part on Lebesgue measure, the sigma-additivity of such measures and the problem of meaningfulness. The results are embodied in two theorems that show the subtle interplay of the concepts just mentioned. I shall not try to formulate their content here.

There are several related topics I have reserved for the end, because the substance of them cuts across several chapters.

The predicate ‘M’ . First, some of the technical details about the introduction of the special meaningfulness predicate ‘M’ in the foundations of set theory raise some natural questions. The most important is that for the standard transformational cases ‘M’ is definable, something that Narens states quite clearly on p. 145. This is true for the standard cases of meaningfulness following the transformational approach of Klein's Erlangen program. Narens does want to emphasize the definability approach to meaningfulness, which I discuss more in detail in a moment, but he does not offer persuasive evidence that to analyze the cases of interest the special predicate ‘M’ is really needed. It is important to remember the reason for introducing a definability concept of meaningfulness. When a relational system, such as those introduced often in the qualitative theory of probability, have only the trivial automorphism of identity, all entities become meaningful. So Narens is certainly right about the need for something additional to take care of such cases. But what he does not show, at least in a way, that I could understand, is that the special primitive ‘M’ does any real work in analyzing any of the cases of interest that require a definability concept of meaningfulness.

Theory of definability . Second, I am surprised that the treatment of the theory of definability is at such an informal implicit level, given its importance among the central ideas of the book. What I have in mind is the totally unreferenced literature and formal concepts that constitute the theory of definability for mathematical theories, not just first-order ones. The first are the criteria of eliminability and noncreativity of definitions, first stated by the Polish logician  Lesniewski (1931) . The second is  Padoa's principle (1902, 1903)  for proving the independence of a primitive concept—independence in the sense of not being definable in terms of the other primitive concepts of a theory. The method is very intuitive and not restricted to first-order theories: give two models of the theory in which all the primitives except the one to be shown independent are exactly the same, and then give two extensionally different interpretations of that primitive. The formal theory of this method was given a firm foundation by  McKinsey (1935)  and  Tarski (1935–1936) . Padoa's principle is exactly what is needed to prove that a concept is meaningless with respect to Narens’ definability concept of meaningfulness, by showing it is independent of, and, therefore, not definable in terms of the primitive concepts of the theory. Finally, there is  Beth's (1953)  theorem that in first-order theories a primitive concept is either independent, in the sense of Padoa, or is definable by an explicit formula of the theory. In my view this formal literature on definability is more pertinent to Narens’ main enterprise than is axiomatic set theory, which does not play any significant role in his main results, except for making explicit the introduction of atoms.

Some other minor omissions . Third, again a minor but surprising omission in the survey and extensive analysis of the transformational theory of meaningfulness is the absence of any reference or discussion of the  Tarski and Givent (1987)  theorem that there are just four binary relations between elements of a given universe invariant under every permutation of the elements, namely, the universal relation, the empty relation, the identity relation and its negation, the diversity relation ( Lindenbaus & Tarski, 1934–1935/1983 , obtained a closely related result). A really minor but also surprising omission is the reference to  Zermelo (1908) . This is his fundamental paper on the axiomatic foundations of set theory, referred to and discussed extensively in the text, but missing from the references.

I emphasize that these general comments of mine are of minor importance in judging the interest and correctness of Narens’ extensive analysis of concepts of meaningfulness. The book will occupy a permanent significant position in the large literature on the theory of measurement.