10.1016/j.jmp.2009.07.008
A 100 year anniversary of a scientific invention is typically a look back, a reminiscence of glorious days when the breakthrough of an innovative idea and concept took place. Innovations which after such a long time usually have lost a lot of their power and have been superseded by new techniques and technologies. However, there are exceptions: some ideas and concepts remain young, innovative and relevant even after 100 years of intensive usage. Factor analysis is one of them. In 1904 the origins of factor analysis have been briefly laid out in a publication by  Spearman (1904)  which in 2004 has been taken as the occasion to mark the 100th anniversary of factor analysis in a conference that was hosted by the L.L. Thurstone Psychometric Laboratory at the University of North Carolina. This book is a result of the conference and comprises 15 contributions of distinguished scientists on the historic roots and development of factor analysis as well as very recent trends and research foci related to latent variable models. The book convincingly shows that factor analysis is extremely spry at its centennial, that latent variable modeling is a thriving research field, blossoming not only as a consequence of the current abundance of data and computing power but also due to its deep theoretical rooting within mathematics as well as psychology. It is a remarkable success story of factor analysis that we can now look at after a hundred years and this book provides a concise review of factor analysis’ path throughout the 20th century and an effective overview on the current research strands.

The ‘collection of topics is eclectic, but each is scholarly and thoughtful’ as the editors point out rightfully (p. x). The book is a valuable addition to each library. It is quite unique in its combination of historical descriptions, thorough treatment of fundamental theoretical problems and a rich source of current developments and trends. Thus, this book succeeds in being very versatile and I can recommend it for at least three different purposes: as an excellent resource for researchers who are familiar with the basics and would like to get a brief account of the current research topics, as an interesting and entertaining reading for those who would like to learn about the historical roots of factor analysis, its relationship to measuring intelligence, the scientific contributions of Charles Spearman and Louis Leon Thurstone, and thirdly as a reasonable textbook for a graduate course on latent factor modeling. In addition, the rich bibliographies given in each chapter provide a multitude of starting points for in-depth study and background information.

The layout of the book is very appealing and the publisher and the editors have to be congratulated for the high-quality result. For a collection of articles, the notation used is fairly homogeneous, standardized and easy to follow. The book shows remarkably few typos and spelling errors (p. 310 may be called the exception to the rule; misprinting all ‘fi’-ligatures and missing a couple of characters in the reference list).

After the preface to the book, Chapter 1, indited by one of the editors, provides a more detailed introduction into the 15 contributions written by the distinguished invited speakers of the conference. Chapters 2, 3, and 4 start out with a historical focus on Spearman’s fundamental work for factor analysis and the pivotal influence of Thurstone on the development of factor analysis. The contribution of David J. Bartholomew on ‘Three faces of factor analysis’ is one of the gems of the volume: starting out with the origins of Spearman’s idea and Thomson’s alternative model, he shows the generalization of factor analysis by reformulating it as a linear model, and then providing a unified framework in the form of the General Linear Latent Variable Model. This holistic approach is extremely helpful and provides access to a broad spectrum of problems and applications. As a historical interlude, Lyle V. Jones points out a number of important phases in Thurstone’s life and their influence and relationship to his scientific contributions.

In Chapter 4, R. Darrell Bock leads the readers back to the early 1930s providing a vivacious description on how Thurstone came to develop the centroid method for multiple factor analysis. Garnished with quotations from Thurstone’s publications and some imaginary dialogues, Bock re-narrates the various steps of progress when combining the idea of multiple factors with matrix algebra and Hotelling’s iterative principal components procedure. While the first four chapters–in line with the historical development–focus on the psychometric school of factor analysis, Karl Jöreskog in his contribution provides a concise account of the development of the statistical methodology as well as the computational methods since the early 1950s. This chapter provides an excellent summary of the core problems in factor analysis using a mathematical framework that allows one to touch upon a broad spectrum of important research activities around factor analysis in the last 50 years: different factor extraction methods, confirmatory factor analysis, factorial invariance, structural equation modeling, path analysis, econometric and time series models, as well as general covariance structures and tetra- and polychoric correlations. This chapter takes a central role in the whole volume. It provides the fundamental mathematical description of factor analysis and outlines the various extensions. Surely, the personal bias towards the research areas of Karl Jöreskog is perceptible, but that is only fair with respect to his achievements. The chapter links the historical foundations of statistical factor analysis with modern challenges in latent variable modeling and by doing so provides an excellent overview of the state-of-the-art in this field enabling novices in the domain to quickly reach the cutting edge problems. A number of prominent research areas in latent variable modeling are then discussed in further detail in some of the chapters to follow.

Kenneth A. Bollen (Chapter 6) and John J. McArdle (Chapter 7) focus on the analysis of longitudinal social science data. Bollen takes a look back to the origins of modern latent curve modeling and extracts two major lessons to be learned from the historical review: first, the traditional case-by-case growth-curve model keeps the emphasis on the individual case, which is no longer pertained by contemporary latent curve models; second, the traditional exploratory factor analysis approach to latent curve modeling is superior when multiple factors are to be extracted for the construction of the growth trajectories. Mc Ardle’s contribution complements the previous chapter by focussing on the confirmatory or structural factor analysis of longitudinal data. The different scenarios for longitudinal factor analysis are categorized in five steps and panel data is the predominant data structure that is underlying the discussion. Starting out with Spearman’s one factor model for single-occasion data, the different principles of factor invariance are explained on two-occasion longitudinal data. Extensions to incomplete data and factor rotations is dealt in the two-occasion case first, before the traditional approach to multi-occasion data is reviewed. In the final step dynamic extensions are provided for the advanced research stage of longitudinal data.

Having glanced at factorial invariance for longitudinal data in the previous chapter, a more general discussion of the invariance problem is given by Roger E. Millsap and William Meredith in Chapter 8. Providing a thorough historical perspective of this topic, they point out the technical progress that has been made, but which also led to new challenges in use and interpretation. They focus on two particular problems: the meaningfulness problem and the specification search problem.

Using statistical models as an approximation of reality is the common unifying framework of modern scientific research. From time to time one needs to be reminded that this viewpoint has not always been predominant. Robert C. MacCallum, Michael W. Browne and Li Cai reconstruct the more implicit rather than explicit notion of a factor model in the classic papers of factor analysis. As can be expected from the historical epistomological context, Spearman ‘believed that the model implied by his theory accounted exactly for the relevant real-world phenomena.’ (p. 156). In line with the evolvement in the philosophy of science, the understanding grew that models will only be approximations of reality that have some utility when developed in a proper way. The fact that models are only approximations has a direct impact on various issues, among others the performance of different estimation methods. The second part of the chapter provides a detailed discussion using some simulations on model error. The general finding is that factor analysis based on ordinary least squares is advantageous over maximum likelihood in recovering weaker common factors.

As was pointed out in Chapter 4, Thurstone couldn’t have made progress without Hotelling’s iterative principal component analysis procedure. It is hence not surprising that factor analysis and principal component analysis come together and often are mixed in textbooks. Sometimes, the two terms are even used as synonyms. Keith F. Widaman presents a structured comparison between Common Factor Analysis (CFA) and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) along four principles: first, that they have different goals, second, that CFA extends a theory to both manifest and latent variables, while PCA emphasizes manifest variables only, third, the principle of factorial invariance, and fourth, the principle of truism. The structured approach elucidates the different theoretical ramifications of the two approaches and helps in distinguishing the much confused methods.

Spearman’s seminal paper on factor analysis in 1904 derived from his considerations on developing a scientific theory of general intelligence and postulated the existence of one common factor  
                      g 
                   , that produces the correlation between all tests of mental ability. Throughout his academic life, Spearman was creative and innovative in defending his theory against the challenges brought forward by other researchers in the field. John L. Horn and John J. McArdle trace back the various criticisms and responses and illustrate Spearman’s intense attempts to rescue, retain and restructure his theory. The main alternative theories of human intelligence are presented in this chapter as well, always in connection and as a response to Spearman’s general intelligence theory. While there is now common agreement that Spearman’s model of one common factor of human intelligence cannot be pertained, the structured attempt of Spearman to test such a model has been the source for many important developments in the scientific research of human cognitive capabilities: from proper experimental designs for mental ability tests, via questions of construct validity to different methods of rotation in factor analysis. It is particularly instructive for the non-psychologist to see the close connections between the scientific discourse about human intelligence and its impact on the development of factor analysis variants and modifications.

After this general treatise on human intelligence the remainder of the book addresses diverse issues of high interest. In Chapter 12 and 13 the focus is once again on longitudinal data but now not focussing on average growth in the population but the individual changes of particular persons. While John R. Nesselroade (Chapter 12) discusses the concept of factor invariance with respect to individual level factor analysis in a theoretical setting and points to the serious limitations that this concept might have in this realm, Michael W. Browne and Guangjian Zhang (Chapter 13) present some extensions and supplement to Cattell’s P technique.

Irini Moustaki extends the discussion of factor analysis and latent structures to categorical responses embedding the different situations into the framework of general linear models using the full information approach. Providing the necessary specifications she presents the various models for binary, nominal and ordinal responses, and for discrete time survival variables using different distributional assumptions in the general framework terminology. The model estimation using the E-M algorithm is explained and two applications of mixed metric and categorical variables illustrate the usefulness of the approach.

In exploratory factor analysis, rotation is most often done routinely looking for the factor setting that yields the subjectively best interpretation. Robert I. Jennrich makes a strong case to reconsider the choice of rotation as an optimization problem based on rotation criteria. Revisiting the Thurstone 26 variable box data, he explains the reference structure and early analytic methods for finding a solution to the rotation problem. With a strong focus on quartic criteria he presents various forms of analytic oblique rotation algorithms. The second part of the chapter is devoted to the treatment of standard errors for rotated factor loadings. Standard software persistently neglects this aspect and does not provide any standard error measures for the parameter estimates. Jennrich outlines a number of potential measures, mostly based on asymptotic methods that rely on linear approximations. A brief summary is also given on recent attempts to use non-linear methods such as the jacknife, bootstrap and Markov-Chain-Monte-Carlo methods. The availability of modern computer power in combination with the techniques of numerical derivatives seems to open up new potential in this area of research.

After 100 years it can be expected that even the fundamental assumptions of a statistical technique have been challenged. The final chapter deals with the constraint of linearity and discusses the aspect of non-linearity in two settings: first, as non-linear factor analysis in the form of additive or general parametric models and second, in the context of LISREL as a nonlinear structural equation model. This chapter complements the non-linearity discussion that derived from categorical responses in Chapter 14 and constitutes a good starting point for contemporary research and challenges.

After reading the book one is attempted to run a factor analysis on the content of the book to see the dominant dimensions. While the ordering of the chapters does not appear convincing at first glance, the interspersed historical considerations increase the reading pleasure and throughout the book one always stays sure that the chapters–as diverse as they might appear–are closely connected. So, this book should fulfill all tests for applicability of factor analysis and it is left to the readers to find out the common factors and the loadings for each chapter. Clearly, there is a historic dimension, closely related to the experience and academic seniority of some authors, there are the dimensions of the psychometric school and the statistical school, there is the dimension of innovation and new challenges. You may want to find out the more subtle ones.

This book is very versatile and offers a lot of intellectual food. It is an homage to factor analysis as a scientific method, a method of 100 years that is in wide use, but still entails a lot of secrets and challenges that are worthwhile exploring. This book gives a very good review on the past 100 years. A review that is bipolar, focussing on the origins and on the more recent challenges. A review that is definitely worth reading.