10.1016/j.jmp.2014.03.001
In my final year of high school in 1958, I had a summer job in James P. Egan’s psychoacoustic laboratory at Indiana, and I began to hear about Estes’ work. Later that year, I became an undergraduate at IU, with a major in chemistry. In my freshman year, I was offered a job working for Arnold Binder, a psychology professor. Binder put me to work on a joint research project with Estes that involved running subjects, doing a little math, and analyzing data. On occasion I would meet with both professors and give them my take on what I thought the subjects were doing in the experiment, and I would get excited whenever my observations led to some changes in their research strategy. In my senior year, my interests had turned away from a career in chemistry, and mathematical psychology had captured my attention. I must say that Frank J. Restle also played a big role in my change of heart. In my final undergraduate year, I was allowed to take the early efforts to design the field of mathematical psychology in the late 1950s were greatly assisted by grants from the Social Science Research Council, especially to conduct summer institutes in the application of mathematics to the social sciences held at Stanford. By the early 1960s, something gelled. First books applying math- ematics to psychological problems had already begun to appear, and several other universities were setting up graduate programs in mathematical psychology. Then the Journal of Mathematical Psy- chology was born in 1964. Shortly after the journal, annual sum- mer meetings for mathematical psychology started, and finally in 1976 these meetings gave rise to the incorporation of the Society for Mathematical Psychology, which continues to this day. While it is difficult to sort out the relative contributions of the leaders in creating the field, Estes was a central figure in all of these develop- ments.Journal of Mathematical P Contents lists availa Journal of Mathem journal homepage: www A tribute to William Kaye Estes (1919–20 I am pleased to have been asked to write a tribute to William Kaye Estes for this Special Issue of the Journal of Mathematical Psychology in his honor. Estes was without a doubt one of the central figures who established the field of mathematical psychology, and his early work created an approach to cognitive modeling that remains active today. There have beenmanymoving and impressive tributes to Estes written by eminent psychologists, some that emphasize more his research accomplishments and others that reflect more on personal experiences. In addition, Estes himself has written a detailed and very interesting autobiography (Estes, 1989). In fact, by submitting ‘William K. Estes’ into Goggle Web Search, an impressive set of options becomes available. I do not want this tribute simply to be a distillation of what has already been written about Estes, nor do I want to dwell overly on my own personal experiences with him. I will, however, share some first hand personal history with Estes, especially from the point of view of a student in the early years leading up to the establishment of mathematical psychology and on his early work in cognitive modeling. I believe that Estes’ lasting contribution to psychology will be his approach to cognitivemodeling thatwas set in the 1950s and continues to be alive andwell in the hands ofmany researchers today. Thus my main goal in writing this tribute is to try and shed some light on Estes’ approach to cognitive modeling. Estes was hired in 1946 as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Psychology at Indiana University soon after the end of the Second World War, and by coincidence this was the same year my father was hired from the Navy into the School of Education at IU. During my elementary and early high school years in Bloomington, I was oblivious to the work of Estes and his colleagues who were, at that time doing seminal work in constructing mathematical models of the learning process. Later I discovered that during this same period mymother and Kay Estes, Bill’s wife, knew each other and were often found at the same weekly bridge parties.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2014.03.001sychology 59 (2014) 3–5 ble at ScienceDirect atical Psychology .elsevier.com/locate/jmp 11) graduate statistics series in psychology, and Estes let me take his graduate seminar in mathematical modeling. I vividly recall one of Estes’ homework assignments, where he gave the class a set of error-success sequences from a hypothetical learning experiment and asked if they came from the all-or-none model or the linear operator model of Bush and Mosteller. This task seemed very similar to the tasks I had encountered in qualitative chemistry, where the instructor would give us a vial of chemicals and ask us which elements were in it. I think this early Estes assignment embraces much of what characterizes his lasting effect on how cognitive modeling should be conducted, and I will focus on this for most of the rest of the tribute. I suspect that my performance in these graduate psychology classes contributed a lot to my receiving a three-year National Defense Education Act (NDEA) Fellowship to Stanford starting in 1962 to pursue studies in mathematical psychology. In that same year, Estes was hired in the Psychology Department at Stanford, and he, along with Richard C. Atkinson, a former student of Estes, Gordon H. Bower, and Patrick Suppes had completed the design of a new graduate program inmathematical psychology.My first year graduate colleagues included Robert A. Bjork, Alan B. Ruskin, Henry A. Taylor, James T. Townsend, John I. Yellott Jr., and Joseph L. Young, and our group was the first in a series of five or six yearly cohorts that would come to Stanford to study mathematical psychology. Many of the students who went through this program ended up having major careers in the field. When I think about thosewhowere responsible for creating and making viable the field ofmathematical psychology, several names come to mind immediately. In addition to the aforementioned Stanford professors, there were Robert R. Bush, Clyde H. Coombs, and R. Duncan Luce. Bush, Luce, and Suppes came from back- grounds in physics, mathematics, and philosophy, respectively; however, Estes, and the others were already psychologists. Their m4 Announcement / Journal of Mathe More relevant to this tribute, I will focus more specifically on Estes’ programmatic approach to research in mathematical psychology. Mathematical Psychology can be subdivided into several research areas, e.g. Batchelder (2010), butwithout question the largest area is the development of cognitive models in the so-called softer areas of cognition. These areas include learning, memory, categorization, concept acquisition, choice response time, and attention, and they are referred to as ‘soft’ because unlike vision, audition, and psychophysics, they lack corresponding physical science substrates connected with them. Some would include decision making in the soft category, although, unlike the others, there is another science, namely economics, connected to this area. Today, of course, there are researchers attempting to connect all of these areas to cognitive neuroscience; however, I can confidently assert that such efforts were almost completely absent in the early days of cognitive modeling. I believe that it is indisputable that Estes’ early approach to mathematical modeling in these softer areas has led to the establishment of standards for this sort of work that remain operative today. Estes’ stimulus sampling theory, e.g. Atkinson and Estes (1963), was certainly a precursor to later approaches to constructing cognitive models, e.g. Healey et al. (1992a,b); however, inmy view, it is his approach tomodeling rather than the particular models that he created, that will end up having a lasting effect. Estes’ approach was to select experimental paradigms with explicit data structures that directly revealed phenomena in an area. Examples include probability learning experiments, e.g. Estes (1964), the RTT procedure in paired-associate learning, e.g. Estes, Hopkins, and Crothers (1960), and a paradigm to evaluate what is initially available in immediate visual memory for letters, e.g. Estes and Taylor (1964). The next step in Estes’ approach was to construct statistical models for these experimental paradigms. All suchmodels specified hypothetical cognitive structures alongwith associated parameters that could predict the statistical structure of the data, and consequently the models were evaluated on their relative ability to closely fit data. Often there were several models that could predict data patterns in a particular paradigm, and the goal then became one of selecting the model that best predicted the data, and rejecting or augmenting themodels that failed in this contest. As a graduate student at Stanford, I recall many exciting timeswhen a statistical analysis showed that a particular cognitive model appeared to give a better fit to a particular set of data than a competitor, and this sort of excitement continued and still continues decades after Estes’ early successes of this sort. As I reflect on the evolution of cognitive modeling from the 1960s to present, I am struck by how much of this work could be characterized in this way. For example, in standard experimental paradigms like simple recognition memory, free recall, choice response time, and categorization, there are dozens of models that have been invented by many different psychologists to predict data in which one model squares off against another. Of course, to evaluate the fit of a model to a set of data involving multiple subjects responding to multiple items, one has to make assumptions about whether or not the parameters are identical across subjects and/or like type items, and in addition whether or not the successive responses of the subjects to the items are realizations of independent events. The usual assumption in most applications of cognitive modeling from the 1950s up to the early 2000s was to assume all the observations to like-type items were independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), which to my mind today seems absurd on its face. Estes was aware of these issues even in the 1950s, and Estes (1956) is a famous article describing the problems that can occur if heterogeneity is not properly modeled. He pointed the way to identifying this problem, and others published articles similarly exhibiting how things can go very wrong if inappropriate sampling assumptions are made.atical Psychology 59 (2014) 3–5 An extremely important step in overcoming these problems has been the incorporation of Bayesian hierarchical modeling, e.g. Lee (2011), which is a natural statistical way to handle heterogeneity. Bayesian statistics goes back for several centuries, and in the past half century or so it has become the standard approach to statistical inference in the statistical sciences. However, it is only in the last ten or so years that cognitive modelers have begun to pose their models hierarchically and employ computational Bayesian inference to evaluate them. Another issue that modelers face when applying Estes’ ap- proach to cognitive modeling in very complex situations is exactly how to decide if one model fits the data better than another. Un- der i.i.d. assumptions,modelers began to use some classical asymp- totic measures like the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), but their use requires that one be able to obtain the likelihood function for the model. When the models became very complex, theorists often resorted to com- puter simulation to show that onemodel could fit a particular data pattern better than another. A seminal addition to the Estes ap- proach of comparing the fit of cognitivemodels camewhenmodel- ers learned about work in model selection in statistics, e.g. Myung et al. (2000). Since then it has become clear in the cognitive mod- eling community that some models are better able to fit data than others by the functional formof their specifications rather than just by some simple goodness-of-fit measure. The statistically relevant term is ‘overfitting,’ and such models are able to wrap around sta- tistical noise as well as the signal in the data, and a proper compar- ison of models therefore requires that one incorporate a penalty for the overfitting potential of a model in evaluating its fit. Conse- quently those following the Estes approach to cognitive modeling today often employ either Bayesian or classical frequentist model selection measures when comparing their models. With these relative recent additions to the Estes’ approach to cognitive modeling, things now seem to be on a solid statistical footing. Recent books and conference proceedings reveal that cognitivemodeling in the Estes style is here to stay, and it has even begun to spread into new areas of cognition, including cognitive neuroscience. To my knowledge, Estes never applied modern model selection and Bayesian methods to his ownmodeling work. Estes himself was very conservative in the sense that it took a great deal of evidence to lead him to change his views. This is a good scientific trait; however, I regret that he was not alive for a few more years so that we could see his reactions to the current level of statistical sophistication that characterizes cognitive modeling today. In any event, I strongly believe that the received approach to constructing and testing cognitive models in the softer areas of cognition is due to Estes. It evolved from his early modeling work, and it continued not only in his later work but also more importantly by the many psychologists that he has influenced along the way. It is this area where Estes’ influence will have a lasting influence on the field of psychology, and his foundational work will continue to inspire new generations to move the field forward. References Atkinson, R. C., & Estes, W. K. (1963). Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology: Vol. 2 (pp. 121–268). New York: Wiley. Batchelder, W. H. (2010). Mathematical psychology. In L. Nadel (Ed.), Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: cognitive sciences (pp. 759–765). New York: Wiley. Estes, W. K. (1956). The problem of inference from curves based on group data. Psychological Bulletin, 53, 134–140. Estes, W. K. (1964). Probability learning. In A. W. Melton (Ed.), Categories of human learning (pp. 89–128). New York: Academic Press. Estes, W. K. (1989). In L. Gardner (Ed.), A history of psychology in autobiography (pp. 94–125). Stanford University Press. Estes, W. K., & Taylor, H. A. (1964). A detectionmethod and probabilistic models for assessing information processing from brief visual displays. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 52, 446–454. mAnnouncement / Journal of Mathe Healey, A. F., Kosslyn, S. M., & Shiffrin, R. M. (Eds.) (1992a). From learning theory to connectionist theory: essays in honor of William K. Estes, Vol. 1. London: Taylor & Francis. Healey, A. F., Kosslyn, S. M., & Shiffrin, R. M. (Eds.) (1992b). From learning theory to cognitive processes: essays in honor of William K. Estes, Vol. 2. London: Taylor & Francis. Lee, M. D. (2011). How cognitive modeling can benefit from hierarchical Bayesian models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 55, 1–7.atical Psychology 59 (2014) 3–5 5 Myung, I. J., Forster, M., & Browne, M. W. (2000). Special issue on model selection. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 44, 1–2. William H. Batchelder E-mail address:whbatche@uci.edu. became very complex, theorists often resorted to com- puter simulation to show that onemodel could fit a particular data pattern better than another. A seminal addition to the Estes ap- proach of comparing the fit of cognitivemodels camewhenmodel- ers learned about work in model selection in statistics, e.g. Myung et al. (2000). Since then it has become clear in the cognitive mod- eling community that some models are better able to fit data than others by the functional formof their specifications rather than just by some simple goodness-of-fit measure. The statistically relevant te