10.1016/j.jmp.2016.08.001
It is a commonly held view that one does not have to delve into the fundamentals of a mathematical notion in order to successfully use it in an empirical application. However, at least for some uses of some mathematical notions this is not true — especially so when it comes to any but simplest uses of such concepts as probability, random variable, and joint distribution. There are several reasons why this is the case. First of all, surprising as it may sound to some, theory of probability is far from being an established mathematical theory on a par with real analysis or topology. There are numerous interpretations of such probabilistic concepts as occurrence and co-occurrence of events, realizations of random variables, and probability itself, each interpretation resulting in a distinct formalization. A “user” of probability theory therefore has to choose and adapt rather than simply adopt a ready-made mathematical formalism. One’s intuition is not of much help in this endeavor as it is notoriously faulty when dealing with probabilistic notions. One should be guided by rigorous formal rules. The problem is, however, that even most rigorously developed does not include rigorous rules of how it should be applied to a specific empirical situation. A rigorous theory of probability measure does not tell us what probability measure should be imposed on a given set of elementary outcomes, and a rigorous theory of random variables will not tell us whether a group of observations are realizations of one and the same random variable or of several different random variables. All of this makes it highly desirable if not necessary for a “user” of probability theory to understand and sometimes critically rethink its basic notions. This especially pertains to such fields as behavioral and social sciences, economics, and quantum physics, the fields where most data and most computations are fundamentally probabilistic even if the word “fundamentally” may not have the same philosophical interpretation in relation to all of them.

This special issue of the  Journal of Mathematical Psychology  is an attempt, perhaps tentative and definitely incomplete, to discuss a spectrum of foundational issues related to empirical applications of probability theory — from psychology to computer science to quantum physics. The interdisciplinary scope of this special issue, and the fact that its articles are semi-tutorial (some even fully tutorial), should make it of interest to a wider circle of scholars and students than the traditional readership of the journal.

The first four papers in the issue (by Hans Colonius, by Ehtibar Dzhafarov with Janne Kujala, by Acacio de Barros, Janne Kujala, and Gary Oas, and by Peter Bruza) are about various aspects of the notion of a system of random variables with or without joint distributions imposable on them. The paper by Samson Abramsky, Rui Barbosa, Kohei Kishida, Raymond Lal, and Shane Mansfield shows how essentially the same problem, of existence or non-existence of certain joint distributions, can be analyzed in an alternative general language, one that does not explicitly deal with random variables. The paper by Louis Narens axiomatically introduces mathematical lattices describing the event spaces in classical and non-classical probability theories. The papers by James Yearsley with Jerome Busemeyer and by Diederik Aerts with Sandro Sozzo deal with a particular version of nonclassical probabilities, quantum ones, as applied to certain problems in cognitive science. They are preceded by two papers, by Andrei Khrennikov with Emmanuel Haven and by Thomas Filk, which provide, each in its own way, a bridge between classical and quantum probabilities, both in physics and beyond. The concluding paper, by Adele Diederich with Peter Oswald, is a semi-tutorial (with applications to decision making) on an important notion missing in the previous papers, that of a random process.

I co-edited this special issue with Reinhard Suck and Janne Kujala, to whom I would like to express my deepest gratitude for the considerable time and effort they put in this project.