10.1016/j.jmp.2017.08.001
Eugene Galanter was one of the seminal figures of modern psychology. His three-volume  Handbook of Mathematical Psychology  (1963–1965), edited with Duncan Luce and Robert Bush, is one of the foundation stones of the discipline of mathematical psychology and remains as relevant and compelling today as when it was written. His remarkable  Plans and the Structure of Behavior  (1960), coauthored with George Miller and Karl Pribram, expounded a far-reaching view of the perception–cognition–action cycle based on control theory, which conceptualized the organization of the central nervous system as a hierarchy of adaptive control. The full implications of this profound view have still not been fully realized or exhausted. The memoir by Galanter’s daughter Michelle recalls a scientist who married a deep theoretical sophistication with a worldly practicality and a unique career forged during the social revolution of the 1960s with its accompanying “cognitive revolution” in psychology.

Eugene H. Galanter, 1924–2016

As a child of the Great Depression, Eugene Galanter attended a high school that was, by modern standards, chronically underfunded. With equipment deficits in the biology lab and a class on paramecium cells, Galanter decided to create a “projection microscope” that would enable the whole class to see the paramecia in question. In the space of two weeks, he designed a beta model that consisted of a 200 W bulb in a metal housing with a toilet paper tube pointed at the microscope’s sub-stage mirror. When this failed, he tried a cardboard enclosure to reduce heat build up and a 1000 W bulb. The ensuing pyrotechnics should come as no surprise. And, perhaps due to this early experience, he chose not to become an engineer. Instead, he decided to become a vaudevillian. Using the stage name Gene Martin, he performed his magic act all along the east coast to rave reviews. After World War II, he went to Bryn Mawr and later to Swarthmore to study philosophy. However, during an entrance exam for advanced studies in psychology, a white haired professor spotted him in the halls. Assuming Galanter was loafing around instead of focusing on the exam, he was ordered to “get in there and take that test”. He did what he was told, aced it, and three years later received a Ph.D. in Psychology from the University of Pennsylvania. This moment in the hallway, like an absurd twist of fate of a folk hero following his destiny, is how Galanter became a psychologist.

Before that eventful moment, however, in 1943, Galanter was drafted into the United States army. Stationed in Europe for three years he saw significant combat and earned the Legion of Merit, Bronze Star, Purple Heart, the Army Commendation for Valor, Croix de Geurre with Palm, and a Presidential Unit Citation. During the final months of the war effort, Galanter and his troops had Heidelberg surrounded. Heidelberg was a university town and arguably the birthplace of experimental psychology. Galanter proposed a negotiation with the other side and, because he spoke German, he himself orchestrated a surrender, ensuring no further destruction of innocent lives and historical architecture. He would not know until several years later the role that the historical events at this university would play in his life. There, Friedrich Arnold had created a physiological laboratory to do research on sensation, and later, Wundt’s research in this same laboratory paved the way for an empirical psychology founded on sensation and perception. These foundations led to the doctrine of associationism and to theoretical and methodological behaviorism.

Galanter entered experimental psychology at a time when a revolution was brewing. The spark for this “cognitive revolution” came from the drive to see behavior as more complicated than a simple response elicited by a stimulus and from the need to develop mathematical models that could capture this complexity. Two systems drove the wheels of motion: one was the development of models to explain how mental processes work; the other was the development of new forms of psychological measurement and analysis to characterize mental processes empirically. In 1956, Galanter was asked to come to Harvard to work with S.S. Stevens. Through papers like “Ratio scales and category scales on a dozen perceptual continua”, Stevens and Galanter developed new methods for the measurement and the representation of sensory phenomena.

In 1958 Galanter and George Miller were invited to the Center for Advanced Studies near Stanford, which was a think tank for the behavioral sciences. In a bulletin about the center it was described as “…a kind of resort for academic hipsters”. A “typical comment on a typical day” there was recorded as Carl Auerbach complaining, “I wasted the whole morning, I might as well waste the afternoon; I’m going to a seminar”. In this laid-back California setting, Galanter learned to fly small-engine aircraft. The heavy cognitive demands of flying and landing an airplane prompted Galanter to consider the remarkable hierarchies that must be involved in learning. With very little else to distract them, George Miller, Karl Pribram and Galanter sat around in what looked like cabins at a summer camp, searching to find what psychology needed: an empirically supported conceptual base. They were convinced that the dominant behaviorist paradigm was hampering the development of the science. To them, it seemed preposterous to believe that all learning could be reduced to stimulus–response reflex. What the three concocted was a new theoretical framework, one that drew on computer-based logic systems, linguistics, and neurophysiology and culminated in the 1960 publication of  Plans and the Structure of Behavior.  In this book, Miller, Galanter and Pribram outlined a cognitive explanation of how human beings work that involved conscious mental operations and then monitoring the outcomes of those operations. But, more than offering a theory of the mechanism of thought and new methods of measuring perceptual experience,  Plans  marked the beginning of a new kind of psychology: one that was concerned with how the mind operates as opposed to the causes of behavior. Decades after his Penn years, Galanter (1970, 1984, 1992) wrote several pieces on the nature of science in which he proposed that science should not concern itself with causation. Though seemingly the sine qua non of experimentation, Galanter instead argued that causal determination was the province of engineering, not science. Standing in good company with this position, that other great psychophysicist Gustav Fechner once wrote, “You ask as to the whether. I answer with the how”.

My father remembered a period in which he was recuperating from an illness as a young child and the doctor who would come to his house twice a week. After laying his hat on top of his coat on a chair in the living room, the doctor with the white flowing mustache would proceed upstairs to my father’s room. He would then unsnap the chromed latches of his medicine bag and extract a case of mysterious vials of different colored, differently shaded, tiny orb-like pills. This doctor was a homeopath. The scientific explanation of his impact on my father, the causal component, is named the “placebo effect”. And yet in what way does the naming of this effect advance our understanding of it? The cure is in the how: the muffled but distinctly metallic sound of the bag’s latches, the dazzling array of pills, the relaxed, dancer-like manner of the doctor himself. The truth is in the how.

What Galanter and others of his time achieved in psychology was a revolution, in the sense that the new work they were doing on cognition and measurement moved the science forward. However, it was a revolution in the purely political sense as well. On the chestnut tree lined streets of Philadelphia, Bob Bush and Galanter lived in a post-war construction town house together. Duncan Luce was also a partner in this formidable team, but he was married at the time and so did not share in the real estate of bachelorhood. Through long days at the lab and evenings spent over martinis, the three formed a collaboration that not only restructured the discipline of mathematical psychology, but restructured its body politic as well. In a bold coup hatched over Thanksgiving dinner, the three formed a plan to install Bush as head of the department at Penn. Bush was an applied mathematician at the time and his move into a leadership role in one of the country’s oldest psychology departments solidified the new direction of psychology toward mathematical modeling.

By the time I knew my father, he was already doing experiments on aircraft noise that uncovered the psychological factor of “annoyance”,—a factor quite distinct from loudness. I remember feeling hard pressed to explain mathematical psychology to my classmates who assumed that he, being a psychologist, must see patients on a couch. Airplane noise and value estimations were not commonly considered topics within the realm of the psychology of the day. However I also remember that our Psychology text in my senior year of high school had, printed in the chapter on sensation, Galanter’s Absolute Thresholds (1962). The visual threshold was defined as follows: “On a clear dark night, a candle flame seen at 30 miles”. When I asked my father about this, he sort of chuckled; “Poetic, dontcha think?” Of course these thresholds had room for poetry because a threshold can only be defined statistically due to the idiosyncratic nature of perception. The “threshold” in and of itself, does not really exist. Creating stochastic models, identifying the probabilities of uncertain outcomes as functions of subjective beliefs as opposed to objective truths had reverberating impact on economics as well as psychology and also contained its own kind of poetry. The title of one of Galanter’s articles (1978), “The annoyance of sound and of other life events”, could have been written by Billy Collins.

As physics, psychology and economics were increasingly shown to have a probabilistic and not a deterministic character, computers also were growing in their presence in and impact on research. Beginning his career at the dawn of the computer age, when computers were unwieldy behemoths the size of studio apartments, Galanter forevermore called even the most streamlined laptop a “machine”. Tutored during his Penn years in Turing machines, Galanter carried forward into his research the idea that non-numerical algorithmic procedures might be an alternative to closed form analytical equations with which to model behavior. The hierarchical structuring of learned behavior outlined in  Plans  formed a close analogy to computer programming. Galanter’s interest in these machines was ever present in his professional life and marked one of our major, early divisions of sensibility. Where my father saw the future and endless possibility, I saw a flashing green cursor. His prescient vision for computers sparked several papers and early research. In an article entitled “Automatic Teaching: the state of the art” (1959), Galanter was one of the first to argue in favor of the utility of computers in classroom instruction. Although ahead of his time, he went on to create a school to teach computer programming and to author several books on the subject. I admit that in the 1980s my skepticism about computers bordered on the panicky and reflected a fear for what Fechner referred to as a “night view” of life: materialistic and mechanistic.

But of course, as time has passed, computers have indeed become integral to research, scientific inquiry, and even day to day life. It turned out my father was right. Gradually, I came around to see the value and usefulness of computers, although when I eventually went into psychology myself, my father and I still had many differences of opinion and approach. I argued for a more qualitative psychology that centered on clinical interviewing techniques. I wanted to capture nuance and individual differences. Linear functions did not, and even geometric functions could not, capture the human soul in my opinion. However a topic we both agreed on was education and we shared a passion to improve its state. My father had been writing and consulting about issues in education throughout his career. I was just starting out and was fascinated by Lev Vygotsky’s continuum of topic area understanding he called “the zone of proximal development”. The problem with assessing the ZPD was in its time consuming, one-on-one nature. And yet, it seemed that was the only way. Through many talks around the dinner table we devised a multi-dimensional matrix that could be embedded in an educational assessment. This assessment would then not only be able to judge correct versus incorrect responses, but would offer an estimate of where a child was within the ZPD in any given topic area. This new method of assessment increased the possible courses of action of the test taker to any of those defined by an experienced clinician and as such, the subsequent path the student creates through his responses provides a description of what the student needed to enable him or her to solve the problem. It would tell how a child understood a topic, not simply whether he or she demonstrated adequate facility. The sheer size of this assessment model meant that it was only possible to build a test like this once the internet offered seemingly infinite storage capacity. The assessment, originally called Children’s Progress, created the possibility for more meaningful assessment of children’s understanding.

With this innovation, I came to see the power of computer-based, non-numerical hierarchies to describe learning, and therefore to teach and assess. From the original cognitive map laid out in  Plans 
 (Test-Operate–Test-Exit), the Children’s Progress architecture was also fundamentally a set of “if …then” commands. Computer technology in the form of computing power had caught up to the demands of innovation, and multi-dimensional learning models can now actually be used in applied education. My father once told me of the lighter his father used for his cigars. It was a large globe with a tiny blue flame in the center that, when a cord on the side was pulled, ignited a spark of fire at the top. As a little boy, my father was captivated by this beautiful object and determined to figure out how it worked. His feeling of wonder preceded the scientific inquiry into the lighter’s underlying mechanism. My father was a great scientist because he found truths embedded in the human experience; he was a great human being because he did not neglect the magic and poetry within those truths. The ‘Flint-Spark-Gas-Ignition’ Model, once discovered, did not obscure the beauty of the blue orb which had given rise to it.