10.1016/j.jmp.2017.03.002
This special issue of the  Journal of Mathematical Psychology  adds to the growing body of research using quantum-theoretic formalisms in behavioral and social sciences. This line of research, initiated in the 1990–2000s by Andrei Khrennikov, Diederik Aerts, and Jerome Busemeyer, is currently represented by numerous conferences and workshops, special issues of journals, books of chapters, and monographs. The authors of the articles published in the present issue are among the most active developers of this field, making this issue a representative snapshot of its state of the art.

The approaches represented in this issue can be called  quantum-like : the humans and groups of humans, while physically macroscopic systems, process information and make decisions in accordance with the principles of quantum information theory and quantum logic. Unlike in the theory advocated by Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose, the quantum properties of cognitive processes are not derived from the quantum nature of the physical processes in the brain. Rather, the humans may be acting in ways similar to electrons because cognitive processes and microscopic processes appear to share the fundamental property of  contextuality . In the language of the contextuality theory developed by Ehtibar Dzhafarov and Janne Kujala, this means that the probabilistic identity of a cognitive event aimed at a particular stimulus or task depends on the stimuli and tasks invoking other cognitive events, above and beyond any direct influences exerted by those stimuli and tasks. In the same way, a measurement of a spin changes its identity depending on what other spins are being measured together with it, even if the other measurements cannot influence the former one directly. In quantum physics, contextuality has been studied and quantified in hundreds of papers with the use of quantum formalisms. It is natural therefore, as was first realized by Andrei Khrennikov in the late 1990s, to employ these formalisms to study the contextuality of cognition. The present issue is a proof that the quantum-like modeling in social and behavioral sciences continues to thrive and develop.

We hope that this issue will be of interest both to the psychologists looking for novel mathematical models and to the physicists looking for novel applications of physical models. The application of the formalisms of quantum theory in psychology, sociology, and economics may very well provide a nontrivial feedback to quantum physics. The use of the basic quantum structures in new classes of systems, states, and dynamics may enlighten new features of these structures and lead to their better understanding.