10.1016/s0022-2496(19)30147-6
Journal of Mathematical Psychology 92 (2019) 102289 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal ofMathematical Psychology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jmp Publisher’s Note Introducing article numbering to Journal ofMathematical Psychology Within the publishing industry, article numbering has emerged as an easy and efficient way to cite journal articles. Article num- bering has already been successfully rolled out to Elsevier’s mul- tidisciplinary open access journal Heliyon, as well as more than 200 other journals, and has been well received by the academic community. Based on that positive feedback, we are now pleased to introduce article numbering to Journal of Mathematical Psy- chology from 92C. What is article numbering? A unique article number is an abbreviated form of an article’s DOI - digital object identifier. Citing an article with an article number is very simple: the article number is used instead of the page range in the citation. Van der Geer, J., Hanraads, J. A. J., & Lupton, R. A. (2018). The art of writing a scientific article. Heliyon, 19, 100205. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2018.100205. While journal volumes and issue numbers will remain in place, article numbering will now play the key role in identifying spe- cific articles. The introduction of article numbers brings several benefits for the journal and its readers and authors. Benefits of article numbering • More flexible reading: Article content can be optimized based on the device used to access it, supporting reading on- the-move, without needing to know how many traditional print pages the article takes up. • Increased options for grouping related content: In online collections and Special Issues, articles can now be placed in any order, helping readers to identify papers relevant to their research interests faster. • Faster publication: With article numbers, the version of record of the article is online and citable as soon as the proof corrections have been incorporated, ensuring readers have access to the latest research faster. What will change for me? • When citing articles, you will need to use the article num- ber; see the example provided above. More examples of cit- ing articles with article numbers are available in the Guide for Authors at the journal homepage on www.elsevier.com. Please note that the export citation functionality available on ScienceDirect for this journal already supports this new citation format. • Each article will have page numbers starting from page 1, but the issue itself will not have sequential page numbering. • The table of contents in the print issue will reflect the order of the online issue; print readers will need to refer to the article number, clearly visible at the top of every page, to identify articles of interest. • The printed issue spine will no longer include a page range. We are delighted that Journal of Mathematical Psychology readers and authors will now enjoy these benefits. Gail M. Rodney https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2496(19)30147-6 0022-2496/