10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102342
Inferring the nature of unobservable cognitive processes (or “systems”) from data is never straightforward. Hence, there is ongoing debate about the most appropriate inferential tools to achieve this goal. Our recent paper, ( Stephens, Matzke, & Hayes, 2019 ) (hereafter, SMH), advocated the use of state-trace analysis (STA) over reliance on functional dissociations to test for multiple underlying latent variables. SMH applied state-trace analysis to databases of studies from the reasoning and category learning literatures, and found that many dissociations previously seen as evidence for two latent variables were consistent with the operation of only one latent variable.  Ashby (2019, hereafter, “Ashby”) ; offered a critique of our approach as it relates to the COVIS dual-systems model of category learning. The main points of contention were: (1) the novelty of the contribution of the SMH state-trace analyses; (2) the cumulative theoretical value of a large body of observed dissociations; (3) what can be concluded from STA about rival models of cognitive “systems”; (4) the contribution of STA to inferences about latent variables, and related issues around parsimony and the monotonicity assumption of STA, (5) other evidence in support of COVIS that could be considered. We deal with each point in turn.

The rationale behind the state-trace analyses of SMH was explicit: we highlighted that a key form of behavioral evidence supporting the involvement of multiple “systems” (or “processes”) in category learning (and in many other areas of psychology) has been functional dissociations — interaction effects identified using linear statistical models such as analysis of variance (ANOVA). However, rejecting that a single latent variable could account for these effects relies on the strong – and probably false –  linearity assumption , that the latent variable would have a linear mapping onto observed response probabilities for the two dependent variables (e.g., responses to rule-based (RB) and information-integration (II) category learning tasks). Instead of relying on linear models to test the ordinal behavioral effects that must be explained by competing cognitive models, we advocated the use of state-trace analysis. STA makes the milder – and more realistic – assumption that the mapping to response probabilities is merely monotonic, rather than linear. In other words, a key suggestion is that STA supersedes ANOVA, and should be used to test for ordinal patterns that cannot be accounted for by a single latent variable (i.e., non-removable interactions; also see  Dunn, Kalish, & Newell, 2014 ).

Ashby raised the concern that the SMH state-trace analyses contribute nothing new, because he has previously acknowledged that dissociations are insufficient to rule out alternative interpretations (p. 196). However, Ashby later listed a series of dissociations (in specific directions) that were predicted by COVIS but not the single-system Generalized Context Model (GCM,  Nosofsky, 1986 ), such as the selective effects of feedback delay, working memory load, and switching response buttons on either rule-based or information-integration tasks (p. 198). Therefore, Ashby evidently still sees these kinds of dissociations as an important part of the evidence for COVIS. The key point of SMH was that rather than using ANOVA to test these effects, STA provides a more coherent and rigorous method for inferring latent dimensions from ordinal data patterns. To be clear, if the ordinal effects uniquely predicted by COVIS do not hold up against STA, then arguably there is nothing new for GCM or other rival models to explain. On the other hand, if the predicted effects do hold up against STA and they cannot be accounted for by other models, then we have strong evidence favoring COVIS. The key goal of SMH was to examine “ how much  evidence depends on the linearity assumption and thus if this assumption is relaxed so that only monotonic mappings are assumed, how many of the effects remain” (p. 4). Far from contributing nothing new, we demonstrated that few – but indeed some – effects remain when STA is applied.

Ashby argued that it is unsurprising that a single dissociation from a given experiment can be accounted for by a single latent variable, but the existence of many such dissociations strengthens the argument for multi-variable models like COVIS. However, although a series of consistent observations from a general approach may support that the methods are reliable, such consistency does not guarantee that the methods are valid. On the contrary, if the process of deriving inferences about underlying latent variables from data is flawed in a given approach (which is what we are arguing about inferences based on dissociations), this remains true regardless of how many variants of the approach are considered. Worse still, flawed methods for inferring latent variables from data that are repeated across experimental paradigms can lead to a spurious increase in confidence in the underlying theory (cf.  Rotello, Heit, & Dubé, 2015 ).

Ashby stated that “state-trace analysis was never designed to identify the number of underlying systems, and it is known that there are no state-trace plots that can provide any information about this issue” (pp. 195–196). Although we agree that no statistical procedure can single-handedly identify the number of underlying systems, we argue that STA can still contribute important information. Part of the problem is that the definition of a cognitive “system” remains contentious (see  Keren & Schul, 2009; Newell, Dunn, & Kalish, 2011 , for discussion of different ways of characterizing such systems).  Ashby and Ell (2002)  suggest that systems need be differentiated from one another at the level of formal specification, psychological assumptions and neurobiology. At the formal (or computational) level,  Ashby and Ell (2002)  suggest that a cognitive system is a mapping of state variables that represent inputs, to state variables that represent observable behavioral outputs or responses, in a manner determined by latent variables or parameters. Two systems are said to exist if there are latent variables that produce mappings that are unique to each system.

We see STA as making an important contribution to  this level  of the “one vs. two systems” debate. Notably, because it does not depend on the tenuous linearity assumption, STA provides a stronger test of the behavioral evidence for latent variables than a list of empirical dissociations (e.g., as cited by  Ashby & Valentin, 2017 ). That is, if ordinal data patterns are to be tested as part of the evidence for a theory or model that proposes the involvement of multiple distinct systems, then STA should be preferred over dissociations tested with linear models — especially when the dependent variables are unlikely to be comparable, because they are performance levels in different tasks (such as RB and II tasks).

It should be clear from this discussion that we agree that STA alone cannot adjudicate between competing “single-system” or “dual-system” models. Such adjudication requires multiple levels of conceptual analysis and criteria that go well beyond state-trace results, such as the plausibility of model assumptions, their internal logic and their ability to account for existing data and generate novel predictions (cf.  Myung, Pitt, & Kim, 2005; Newell et al., 2011 ). Ashby misrepresents our position in this regard (e.g., on p. 197 of  Ashby, 2019 , “their conclusion that the GCM is a better model of categorization than COVIS…”); we made no claims about STA as the final arbiter of debates about cognitive models — and indeed, we did not conclude in favor of any specific model. We did offer examples of how components of models like GCM may map to the latent variables uncovered by STA, but these were for purposes of illustration only. We see STA as offering a more coherent and rigorous way of testing claims about the links between observed data and hypothesized cognitive processes than relying on dissociations. This is an important part of the theory testing process — but we never claimed it was the entire process.

A substantial part of Ashby’s argument was that STA results are not diagnostic about the number of required latent variables, because one-dimensional state-trace plots can arise when either one or multiple latent variables are present, and similarly two-dimensional plots can arise from either one or multiple latent variables. Exactly the same two points were raised in a previous critique ( Ashby, 2014 ). This was followed by a detailed refutation and defense of STA logic ( Dunn et al., 2014 ). We will not re-iterate the entire defense by Dunn and colleagues here, but highlight key considerations that are relevant to the state-trace results in SMH. As a preliminary comment though, we note that the Ashby critique ignores that fact that we devoted a considerable portion of our paper to the complexities of interpreting STA (see SMH 5.2  What we can and cannot conclude from STA ).

We agree with Ashby that one-dimensional state-trace plots can arise when either one or multiple latent variables are present. However, this does not invalidate the use of STA in the current context. The observation of a one-dimensional state-trace plot (or of many such plots, as SMH found) remains theoretically informative. If a one-dimensional state-trace cannot be rejected, this implies either: (a) the effects are mediated by multiple latent variables, but these are functionally dependent — that is, the latent variables fail to differentially affect the dependent variables (e.g., RB and II tasks), or the independent variables (e.g., feedback timing and learning block) do not differentially affect the latent variables, or (b) the effects of the independent variables on the dependent variables are mediated by only one latent variable. Option (a) indicates (at a minimum) that stronger experimental tests of the theory are needed. Perhaps performance on RB and II categorization tasks does not differentially depend on verbal and procedural systems, as Ashby and colleagues have assumed, or perhaps a stronger manipulation of the independent variables is required, or perhaps the study was simply underpowered. Option (b) raises questions about the explanatory value of postulating more than one latent variable. In the case of the SMH analyses of studies testing the predictions of COVIS, this option needs to be considered — because many theoretically important manipulations (working memory load, feedback processing interference, unsupervised learning, etc.) have failed to produce a two-dimensional state-trace. This point is especially relevant to Ashby’s surprising suggestion that we could have concluded that a one-dimensional state-trace plot was “consistent with 10 underlying latent variables” (p. 196). While such a conclusion is possible in principle, one would question the value of adding multiple latent variables that had the same functional relationship with measured outcomes.

This is the context in which SMH made a brief reference to “parsimony”; choosing the simplest explanation needed to account for the observed ordinal patterns. Ashby misinterpreted our view of parsimony as being defined merely according to the number of assumed systems. Following from our earlier comments, we agree that in evaluating rival cognitive models with different “systems” architectures, formal measures of model parsimony, which quantify tradeoffs between complexity, flexibility, and explanatory scope, are needed (see  Pitt & Myung, 2002 ).

That said, we find Ashby’s treatment of model parsimony to be somewhat confusing. In comparing the parsimony of COVIS and GCM, Ashby (p. 198) stated that “the GCM is mathematically equivalent to a special case of the procedural system of COVIS”, which implies that GCM must be more parsimonious in terms of the number of both systems and parameters. However, Ashby (p. 198) also suggests that COVIS is  more  parsimonious than GCM in terms of its “parameter-free a priori predictions” about dissociations. Rather than calling these predictions “parameter-free” we would instead characterize them as expectations about how particular independent variables (e.g., feedback-delay, dual-task) selectively influence latent variables, which in turn drive performance in RB and II tasks. These predictions speak to the  empirical adequacy  of COVIS, which is an important part of model comparison. Nevertheless, this does not undermine the usefulness of STA in assessing whether the observed effects of manipulations like feedback-delay on categorization decisions, demand the mediation of two or more latent variables.

Ashby additionally argued that STA is not diagnostic because two-dimensional state-trace plots can also arise from either one or multiple latent variables. Again, this does not invalidate the application of STA in the current context. If a two-dimensional state-trace plot is found, two theoretically interesting inferences are possible — either two or more latent variables were affected in the experiment, or only one latent variable was affected but it was not monotonically related to the dependent variables. SMH’s application of STA depended on monotonicity generally being a reasonable assumption. Ashby raised the concern that this assumption is not reasonable, because “in virtually all popular categorization models, performance changes nonmonotonically with one or more parameters” (p. 200). This includes the dimension-weighting parameter,  w , of GCM, or the intercept of a decision boundary for decision-bound models, where a mid-range or intermediate value corresponds to optimal performance, but performance declines for lower or higher values.

One important point to highlight is that Ashby’s inferences about his data also depend upon the monotonicity assumption. As discussed above, Ashby interprets key ordinal data patterns as supporting COVIS, such as the differential effects of working memory load, feedback processing interference, or unsupervised learning on RB and II tasks (p. 198). But if Ashby truly rejects the monotonicity assumption then he must necessarily also reject these inferences within his own approach.

To illustrate the problem, consider the example in  Fig. 1 . The kind of dissociation effect that Ashby cited is shown in  Fig. 1 A; there is a larger difference between conditions for Task 1 than for Task 2. However, if monotonicity cannot be assumed, then little, if anything, can be known about the relationship between a latent variable and a given dependent variable. Problematically, the datapoints in  Fig. 1 A could correspond to the two circular points in  Fig. 1 B. These points lie on the curve presented by Ashby in his  Fig. 1 B, which shows non-monotonic performance across two tasks, when only the  w  parameter from GCM was varied. Thus, although Ashby infers that results like those in  Fig. 1 A show that there is no (or a limited) shift in performance between Conditions 1 and 2 in the underlying latent variable in Task 2, the latent variable driving performance might actually have substantially increased and decreased again, as shown by the curve in  Fig. 1 B. Therefore, no inferences about the direction of change in any latent variables can be drawn from the observed experimental conditions.

A more constructive response to Ashby’s concern is that the monotonicity assumption generally seems more reasonable in building testable cognitive models than the non-monotonic alternative. Monotonicity is a standard assumption in psychological measurement ( Loftus, 1978; Wagenmakers, Krypotos, Criss, & Iverson, 2012 ). For a category learning model to have valid, psychologically interpretable parameters, when task accuracy improves from one learning block to another, then parameters such as dimension-weighting should generally shift towards optimality (or stay the same), not shift away from optimality. Indeed, testing for this kind of parameter interpretability is central to standard assessments of construct validity ( Dunn et al., 2014 ), and part of the recommended good practice in cognitive modeling ( Heathcote, Brown, & Wagenmakers, 2015 ).

Nevertheless, if a two-dimensional state-trace plot is found, a researcher may want to rule out that it is due to a violation of the monotonicity assumption. One way to test for such a violation could be to examine response patterns and model fits, such as checking for non-monotonic shifts in GCM’s  w  parameter. Another way could be to extend STA so that the null hypothesis becomes the one-dimensional non-monotonic curve predicted by a particular model parameter, such as GCM’s  w . For example, Ashby’s curve in  Fig. 1 B that shows the predictions based on  w  have a particular one-dimensional form. This form should be distinguishable from a “cloud” of points in a state-trace plot, which would be predicted if there were instead multiple parameters driving performance. At the very least, data from more conditions could be collected to extend the state-trace plot, and see whether the datapoints simply fall along the particular one-dimensional non-monotonic curve predicted by the single parameter, or instead depart from this curve. As  Dunn et al. (2014)  explained, the monotonicity assumption is not integral to the general STA approach, but simply facilitates its application.

Ashby raised the concern that SMH did not discuss other research that supports COVIS over GCM — such as rule-guided behavior and neuroscientific findings. Here Ashby misrepresented our goals and conclusions — we simply set out to re-analyze the list of human behavioral dissociations laid out by  Ashby and Valentin (2017) , and made no claims that “the GCM is sufficient to account for all categorization behavior” ( Ashby, 2019 , p. 198). Nevertheless, given Ashby’s view that the explicit rule-learning system – which COVIS has but GCM does not – plays a critical role in human category learning, it is a challenge for this view that convincing behavioral evidence is lacking in the SMH state-trace analyses. As for the neuroscientific evidence, Ashby ignored that SMH did comment on this in the General Discussion. We pointed out that dissociation logic is also problematic when applied to comparisons across different tasks of associated patterns of neural activity or spared versus impaired functioning in clinical cases. We discussed that STA can also be applied to these data, as exemplified by the work of  Newell et al. (2011) .

Despite the caveats associated with STA interpretation, we stand by our original claim that many of the functional dissociations identified by  Ashby and Valentin (2017)  do not compel the inference of two underlying latent variables. Rather than having apocalyptic implications for scientific progress in psychology, we actually see our analysis as making a positive contribution to the development of models like COVIS. Our STA results identified a minority of cases where the data  were  consistent with more than one latent variable (e.g., incentivized performance-pressure boosted information-integration learning but impaired rule-based learning). Such cases may represent the most productive contexts for future testing of rival models of categorization.

State-trace analysis, when appropriately reported and interpreted, is therefore a valuable addition to the cognitive scientist’s toolbox for evaluating claims about the unobservable processes that guide our judgments and decisions. More generally, by improving the quality of inferences about psychological constructs drawn from observable performance, state-trace analysis offers a rigorous foundation for theoretical claims about latent processes and thus can enhance the credibility of the published literature in psychological science.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

This research was supported by  Australian Research Council  Discovery Grant  DP150101094  to BKH. DM was supported by a Veni grant  (451-15-010)  from the  Netherlands Organization of Scientific Research (NWO) 
 . We thank the editor for inviting us to submit a response, following publication of the  Ashby (2019)  paper. We wish to state that until notified by the editor, we were unaware that Ashby’s paper had been reviewed and accepted for publication by the journal. We would like to thank John Dunn and Mike Kalish for helpful comments on this manuscript.