10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102468
William H. Batchelder, Irvine, CA, February 2011

Copyright by Ece Batchelder

The  Journal of Mathematical Psychology  publishes two special issues on  Recent Developments in Cognitive Psychometrics  to honor its former editor William H. Batchelder, one of the outstanding scholars in mathematical psychology in the past 50 years. Born 1940 in Mississippi and raised in Indiana, Batchelder earned his Ph.D. at Stanford University in 1966, influenced by first-generation mathematical psychologists such as William K. Estes, Patrick Suppes, Richard C. Atkinson, Gordon H. Bower, and Edward J. Crothers. Following an Assistant Professor position at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (1966–1970), he went to the newly founded University of California, Irvine, in 1971 to join the School of Social Sciences as Associate Professor. Within this school, he established the Cognitive Sciences Department in 1975 jointly with other mathematical psychologists, linguists, and computer scientists and became Professor of Cognitive Sciences in 1976. Later on, along with R. Duncan Luce, he made major contributions towards the establishment of the interdisciplinary Institute of Mathematical Behavioral Sciences at UC Irvine in 1989 and served as its director from 1998 to 2003. Despite a number of visiting professor appointments and research stays in Amsterdam, Bonn, Groningen, Madison, Santa Fe, and Stanford, Batchelder remained faithful to UC Irvine across all these years and stayed there until his death in 2018, scientifically active, inventive, and productive until his last days ( Lee, Narens, & Wagenmakers, 2018 ).

Batchelder’s academic achievements are outstanding and numerous. In addition to his merits as editor of the  Journal Mathematical Psychology  (1975–1979) and associate editor of the  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition  (2000–2002), as president of the  Society for Mathematical Psychology  (1989–1990), recipient of the Lauds and Laurels Award for Distinguished Research at UC Irvine (1994), elected member of the  Society for Experimental Psychologists  since 1997 and editor of seminal books like the recently published two volumes of the  New Handbook of Mathematical Psychology  ( Batchelder, Colonius, & Dzhafarov, 2018; Batchelder, Colonius, Dzhafarov, & Myung, 2016 ), he influenced and enriched the field by pioneering contributions to the mathematical social and behavioral sciences. As  Lee et al. (2018, p. 2)  nicely framed it, “his research was characterized by its elegant combination of creativity and rigor, and driven by his natural tendency to become completely absorbed in an intellectual problem”.

There is a variety of examples one could give for the fortunate combination of creativity and rigor that characterizes Batchelder’s scientific work. One topic that fascinated him from the very beginning was measurement theory. He viewed behavioral measures of any kind – including well established and generally accepted ones – as incomplete and unsubstantiated unless they have been accompanied by an elaborated theory, a measurement model, that clarifies the measure’s underlying assumptions along with its properties (e.g. identifiability and uniqueness), and that allows for systematic empirical model evaluation and derivation of parameter estimation techniques for different types of applications. The first famous measure he analyzed rigorously in such a framework was Arpad Elo’s well-established rating system for chess players ( Batchelder & Bershad, 1979 ). Given that Batchelder was an ingenious chess player, actually a National Chess Master in 1970 as well as Life Master and Senior Master of the US Chess Federation in 1979 and 1982, respectively, his focus on measurement of chess skills was no surprise. By linking Elo’s to Thurstone’s work and showing that the Elo rating system can be viewed as an approximation to handle both static and dynamic estimation of chess skills based on an extended Thurstone Case V model that allows for ties,  Batchelder and Bershad (1979)  established a measurement model of relevance also for other areas of psychology where temporarily changing ability parameters are of interest and data for estimating these parameters are sparse. Additional collaborative research in other areas resulted in measurement models that sometimes confirmed established conventional measures (such as Cohen’s Kappa, which can be shown to follow from the multinomial rater agreement model of  Klauer & Batchelder, 1996 ) but sometimes also disconfirmed them by highlighting that established measures are biased by external influences like guessing (e.g., standard measures of item and source memory in the source monitoring paradigm, see  Batchelder & Riefer, 1990 ) or do not allow for standard interpretations under permissible rescalings of parameter estimates (such as the truth values of the Fuzzy Logic Model of Perception, see  Crowther, Batchelder, & Hu, 1995 ).

Another recurring topic in Batchelder’s research program was his aim to bridge the gap between traditional mathematical psychology and psychometrics, that is, between substantively motivated formal models of cognitive processes on the one hand and state-of-the-art measurement of such cognitive processes on the other hand, including the representation and estimation of individual differences in these processes. He coined the term  Cognitive Psychometrics  to indicate a school that addresses both, mathematical cognitive modeling and psychometric assessment, thus overcoming the unfortunate segregation between mathematical psychology and psychometrics (e.g.,  Batchelder, 2010; Riefer, Knapp, Batchelder, Bamber, & Manifold, 2002 ). In line with his conviction, he published continually in the flagship journals of both disciplines, the  Journal of Mathematical Psychology  (21 SSCI-registered publications) and  Psychometrika  (7 SSCI-registered publications). Few scholars can compete with him regarding success in and impact on both research fields.

Cognitive Psychometrics as established by Batchelder is a general approach to behavioral data that is not necessarily linked to specific cognitive theories, psychometric models, or fields of application. However, two highly influential model families clearly stand out in Batchelder’s scientific oeuvre and exemplify the school of Cognitive Psychometrics currently best:  Multinomial Processing Tree  (MPT) models ( Batchelder, 2017; Batchelder & Riefer, 1999; Riefer & Batchelder, 1988 ) and  Cultural Consensus Theory  (CCT) ( Batchelder, Anders, & Oravecz, 2018; Batchelder & Romney, 1988; Romney, Weller, & Batchelder, 1986 ). Batchelder was a leading pioneer of both MPT and CCT modeling. By far the majority of Batchelder’s publications can be assigned to these model families, making his work absolutely essential for progress in these fields. Therefore, our special issues on Cognitive Psychometrics focus on these two model families and associated methodological questions, with the first issue devoted to new insights on MPT modeling and the second addressing recent CCT extensions and generalizations including associated psychometric models. In what follows, we first outline MPT modeling as a branch of Cognitive Psychometrics, followed by a sketch of recent contributions to MPT modeling included in the first special issue. Next, we summarize the CCT origins and past extensions, before we briefly introduce CCT-related work included in our second special issue on Cognitive Psychometrics.

MPT models are substantively motivated multinomial models for categorical data, typically representing responses of participants to cognitive tasks (e.g., “yes” and “no” responses in recognition tasks). The probability of each response category is assumed to depend on one or more sequences of hypothesized cognitive processes that might give rise to a specific response, and the possible processing sequences underlying all response categories can be summarized in a processing-tree graph. The model parameters  
                            
                               
                                  θ 
                               
                               
                                  s 
                               
                            
                         ,  
                            
                               s 
                               = 
                               1 
                            
                         , …  S , of interest are the latent probabilities of each cognitive process taking place or not and thus elements of the parameter space [0, 1] 
                            
                               
                               
                                  S 
                               
                            
                         , where  S  denotes the total number of to-be-estimated process probabilities. Provided that an MPT model is at least locally identifiable and fits the available data, the  
                            
                               
                                  θ 
                               
                               
                                  s 
                               
                            
                          parameters can be estimated using techniques that are nowadays standard (e.g., maximum likelihood, see  Hu & Batchelder, 1994 ). If, in addition, there is sufficient empirical evidence that each  
                            
                               
                                  θ 
                               
                               
                                  s 
                               
                            
                          really captures the psychological process of interest – typically obtained by means of validation studies using the method of selective influence –, estimates of the  
                            
                               
                                  θ 
                               
                               
                                  s 
                               
                            
                          based on observed response frequencies may be used as “measures of cognitive processes” ( Riefer & Batchelder, 1988 ).

Batchelder and Riefer (1980, 1986)  proposed the first psychological MPT model, 
                            1 
                          
                         
                            1 
                            
                               Riefer and Batchelder (1988)  acknowledged that the model family is actually much older and broader in terms of fields of applications because similar models based on the same mathematical model equation structure and estimation techniques were previously proposed in statistical genetics (e.g.,  Elandt-Johnson, 1971 ). 
                          the paired-clustering model, along with maximum likelihood methods to analyze it statistically. The model was tailored to free recall data for previously studied semantically associated word pairs (e.g., “chair” and “table”). It was primarily designed to separate the probability  c  of successful storage of a word pair from the probability  r  of successful retrieval of a stored word pair. Stimulated by successful validation studies and a number of important empirical insights based on the paired-clustering model (for example, the storage probability  c  is stable in adulthood whereas the retrieval probability  r  declines in older adults, cf.  Riefer & Batchelder, 1991 ), a number of additional storage–retrieval models for alternative memory tasks were developed subsequently ( Alexander, Satalich, Shankle, & Batchelder, 2016; Riefer & Batchelder, 1988, 1995; Rouder & Batchelder, 1998 ). In addition, Batchelder pioneered the development of MPT models for several other cognitive paradigms, for example, source monitoring ( Batchelder & Batchelder, 2008; Batchelder & Riefer, 1990 ), factorial categorization ( Batchelder & Crowther, 1997 ), and discrete choice ( Batchelder, Hu, & Smith, 2009 ). In the subsequent years, these developments stimulated new MPT models in judgment and decision research (e.g.,  Hilbig, Erdfelder, & Pohl, 2011; Pohl, Erdfelder, Hilbig, Liebke, & Stahlberg, 2013 ) and many other branches of cognitive psychology and social psychology as well ( for reviews see Batchelder & Riefer, 1999; Erdfelder, Auer, Hilbig, Aßfalg, Moshagen, & Nadarevic, 2009; Hütter & Klauer, 2016 , respectively; for a defense of MPT models against critics see  Batchelder & Alexander, 2013 ).

The arguably most significant contributions of Batchelder to MPT modeling are methodological in nature. Often in collaboration with his Ph.D. students, he systematized and rigorously formalized the MPT model family in alternative ways ( Batchelder & Riefer, 1999; Purdy & Batchelder, 2009; Riefer & Batchelder, 1988 ), developed statistical techniques for parameter estimation and goodness-of-fit tests for aggregate data ( Hu & Batchelder, 1994 ), for model selection taking model complexity into account ( Wu, Myung, & Batchelder, 2010a, 2010b ), for implementing and assessing order constraints ( Baldi & Batchelder, 2003; Knapp & Batchelder, 2004 ), and for assessing model identifiability ( Schmittmann, Dolan, Raijmakers, & Batchelder, 2010 ) as well as heterogeneity between respondents ( Smith & Batchelder, 2008 ). In the past decade, he contributed significantly to the development of hierarchical Bayesian MPT model families that account for individual differences in model parameters ( Smith & Batchelder, 2010 ) and even more complex models that allow for crossed effects of both respondents and items on model parameters ( Matzke, Dolan, Batchelder, & Wagenmakers, 2015 ), much in the spirit of Item Response Theory. One substantive issue of increasing importance for Batchelder was employing all these MPT modeling techniques for fine-graded psychological assessments of cognitive capacities and deficits in individuals ( Batchelder, 1998 ), mostly with respect to cognitive impairment in special clinical populations ( Alexander et al., 2016; Batchelder, Chosak-Reiter, Shankle, & Dick, 1997; Batchelder & Riefer, 2007; Riefer et al., 2002 ).

The present special issue on Cognitive Psychometrics in honor of Batchelder focuses on advances in methodology (6 articles) and in applications of MPT models (3 articles). In the first methodological article,  Kellen and Klauer (2020)  elaborate on Batchelder’s previous work addressing MPT model selection ( Wu et al., 2010a, 2010b ). Specifically, Kellen and Klauer present an extensive review and discussion of the normalized maximum likelihood (NML) measure that provides an ideal balance between model fit and low functional model complexity. They also present an R package that calculates NML for all types of MPT models using the Gibbs sampler. This is a major step forward since previous applications of the Minimum Description Length principle of model selection typically made use of the Fisher Information Approximation to NML which may run into severe problems for small samples ( Heck, Moshagen, & Erdfelder, 2014 ).

Kellen and Klauer’s article is followed by  Schnuerch, Erdfelder, & Heck ’s ( 2020 ) proposal of using sequential probability ratio tests (SPRTs) to test hypotheses on MPT parameters as rigorously but more efficiently than possible with classical goodness-of-tests such as  
                            
                               
                                  G 
                               
                               
                                  2 
                               
                            
                          or Pearson’s  
                            
                               
                                  χ 
                               
                               
                                  2 
                               
                            
                         . The applicability of a large-sample approximation to SPRTs for composite hypotheses is evaluated using simulation studies, and guidelines for practical applications are provided. The SPRT approach is particularly useful when MPT models are applied to data of single individuals (e.g., in clinical assessments) to minimize the number of items required when testing person-specific parameter hypotheses with controlled type-1 and type-2 error probabilities.

The subsequent articles by  Groß and Pachur (2020)  and  Jobst, Heck, and Moshagen (2020)  evaluate different hierarchical MPT model families with respect to their ability to recover the true data-generating parameters via Monte Carlo simulation—the latent trait model of  Klauer (2010)  and the Beta-MPT model of  Smith and Batchelder (2010)  as implemented in the TreeBUGS package of  Heck, Arnold, and Arnold (2018) . Interestingly, the outcomes of these model recovery competitions are more complex and less unequivocal than one might expect. While the latent-trait model and individual-subject-based estimates adjusted for attenuation stand out as clear winners in Jobst et al.’s study that focuses on correlations across participants, the Beta-MPT model performs better in Groß and Pachur’s evaluation of structural MPT parameters. The different outcomes may be due to the parameter level of interest (level-1 in Groß & Pachur’s study vs. level-2 in Jobst et al.’s evaluation) but they may also be due to the different MPT models (or the associated data structures) employed in their simulation studies. More research is obviously needed.

In their subsequent paper,  Schweickert, Zheng, and Poirier (2020)  develop one approach to model validation by showing how response probabilities can be used to infer the structure of an MPT model when selective influence of factors on model parameters can be assumed. This is illustrated using effects of age and pair-type on the parameters of a paired-associate learning MPT model. They then go on to analyze what can be learned about the form of the MPT model if response times are available in addition to the response probabilities. It turns out that combining response times with associated probabilities determines the order in which processes occur in the tree, an insight that is not possible when responses are considered in isolation.

Article 6 by  Bott, Heck, and Meiser (2020)  addresses the previously neglected fact that hierarchical MPT models not only account for individual differences in parameters but also allow for innovative ways of parameter validation. Previously, parameter validation was limited to selective manipulations of specific target parameters using appropriate psychological treatments applied to all participants. If parameter estimates are available at the individual level, however, the complete spectrum of convergent and discriminant validation techniques well known from classical psychometrics can be applied to MPT parameters as well, provided that external criterion variables are available that should vs. should not correlate with specific MPT parameters of interest according to the underlying psychological theory.  Bott et al. (2020)  outline and illustrate this approach using the latent-trait model with covariates ( Heck et al., 2018; Klauer, 2010 ) to validate source guessing parameters in a multidimensional source-monitoring MPT model ( Meiser, 2005; Meiser & Bröder, 2002 ).

The final three articles in this issue present innovations and elaborated applications of MPT models that became possible because of recent advances in hierarchical MPT modeling.  Lee and et al. (2020)  elaborate on Batchelder’s latest MPT model for disentangling encoding, retrieval, and learning ( Alexander et al., 2016 ) and generalize it to a complex hierarchical Bayesian model that can be used to analyze memory performance data of thousands of patients suffering from cognitive disorders and tested tens of thousands of times. Fitting the model to these data shows how learning, encoding, and retrieval differentially deteriorate across time as a consequence of disease progression.

In a similar vein,  Michalkiewicz, Horn, and Bayen (2020)  employed a Bayesian hierarchical extension of the paired-clustering model ( Batchelder & Riefer, 1980, 1986 ) in a study comparing 7-year olds, 10-year olds, and young adults to investigate age-typical learning patterns in cluster storage ( c ) and cluster retrieval ( r ) across several study–test cycles and relate these changes to external covariates capturing various aspects of cognitive functioning. Their experiments show that hierarchical MPT models enable a deeper understanding of the processes involved in cognitive development and how these processes differ between age groups.

The article by  Heck and Noventa (2020)  on commonalities between Knowledge Space Theory (KST, see  Falmagne, 1989; Falmagne, Koppen, Villano, Diognon, & Johannessen, 1990 ) and MPT modeling closes the first special issue. In this article,  Heck and Noventa (2020)  highlight the generality and flexibility of MPT models by showing that standard probabilistic KST models such as the Basic Local Independence Model and the Simple Learning Model can be implemented as MPT models, thereby not only facilitating exchange of theoretical ideas and statistical results between KST and MPT research but also enabling generalizations and applications of KST in the MPT framework using the associated software.

Cultural Consensus Theory  (CCT) was originally designed as a statistical theory and major methodological tool for anthropology but in the past decade has evolved to a general statistical framework of relevance for all social and behavioral sciences. The key problem in CCT can be described as follows: A group of  N  informants responds to  M  questions referring to a certain knowledge domain, say, properties of a foreign culture. Because the foreign culture is unknown except for these responses, no objective scoring scheme exists for evaluating responses as correct or incorrect. We can think of the informants as anthropologists that previously independently visited and investigated a foreign culture for a shorter or longer period and thus may vary in their expertise when responding to the binary (yes–no or true–false) culture-specific questions subsequently. Given the responses of  N  informants to the same set of  M  questions, how can we determine (a) the unknown competencies of the  N  informants and (b) the true answers to the  M  questions (i.e., the answer key) simultaneously? As  Batchelder and Romney (1988)  framed it, this is essentially a problem of “test theory without an answer key”. Batchelder and Romney also showed that latent class analysis (LCA) with two latent classes provides a solution to this problem after transposing the response data matrix. The ingenious idea of reversing the role of persons and items in LCA (so that the two latent classes actually represent true vs. false items rather than latent person groups differing in their competencies) opens up an entirely new avenue of discovering consensus by integrating information available from several independent informants with varying degrees of expertise.

Romney, Batchelder, and Weller (1987)  and  Romney et al. (1986)  showed for the first time how this CCT method can be used to the benefit of anthropological research. Later on,  Karabatsos and Batchelder (2003)  developed a Bayesian version of the basic CCT model and applied it to general knowledge test data using Bayesian MCMC sampling, thus enabling a comparison between the estimated and the actual answer key for the respective knowledge domain.  Aßfalg and Erdfelder (2012)  and  Waubert de Puiseau, Aßfalg, Erdfelder, and Bernstein (2012)  elaborated on this approach and validated CCT results using recognition and eyewitness memory test paradigms, respectively. They observed strong convergence between the true answer key (which was experimentally controlled in their experiments) and the estimated answer key recovered by the CCT analysis. Also, estimated respondent competencies correctly reflected experimental manipulations of memory strength. Overall, therefore, CCT parameter estimates perform very well and in line with the psychological predictions. This suggests that CCT might also serve as a valuable tool in forensic psychology when trying to determine the truth (i.e., the shared consensus knowledge) based on partially conflicting eyewitness reports of a criminal event.

In the previous 10 years, CCT has seen major advances in the statistical toolbox that can be used for CCT analyses. The past decade was also characterized by extensions of the basic CCT model to different concepts of truth, several dimensions of cultural consensus, and different response formats in the data. Most of these advances were achieved by collaborative research of Batchelder. For example,  Batchelder and Anders (2012)  proposed the latent truth model as an alternative to the basic General Condorcet CCT model (GCM) outlined above. In the latent truth CCT model, truth is conceived as a continuous variable on the unit interval [0, 1] rather than a binary true–false variable as in the GCM. Later on,  Anders and Batchelder (2012)  generalized the GCM variant to a model with several latent consensus truths, such that different latent subgroups of informants respond according to different answer keys. The corresponding finite mixture CCT model, called the Multi-Culture General Condorcet Model, was implemented in a hierarchical Bayesian framework. Moreover, CCT has been generalized to allow for “do not know” responses ( Oravecz, Faust, & Batchelder, 2014 ), continuous responses ( Anders, Oravecz, & Batchelder, 2014; France & Batchelder, 2015 ), ordinal responses to polytomous items ( Anders & Batchelder, 2015 ), mixed item types ( Aßfalg, 2018 ), and inclusion of covariates ( Oravecz, Anders, & Batchelder, 2015; Oravecz, Faust et al., 2014 ). Applications of these CCT model variants include, among others, evaluations of on-line reviews and questionnaire data ( France & Batchelder, 2014 ), assessments of consensus about psychological concepts ( Oravecz, Faust, Batchelder, & Levitis, 2015 ), and individual differences as well as consensus concerning what makes people feel loved ( Heshmati, Oravecz, Pressman, Batchelder, Muth, & Vandekerckhove, 2019 ). Importantly, across recent years, very general hierarchical Bayesian versions of CCT have been developed and implemented in software, thus facilitating further CCT applications in the future (e.g.,  Anders, Alario, & Batchelder, 2018; Oravecz, Vandekerckhove, & Batchelder, 2014 ).

The second special issue on Cognitive Psychometrics in honor of William H. Batchelder includes eight articles, six of which report on recent advances in CCT modeling while two articles present innovative IRT models of relevance for future CCT applications. In the first article,  Aßfalg and Klauer (2020)  generalize previous work of  Anders and Batchelder (2012, 2015) ,  Anders et al. (2014) , and  Aßfalg (2018)  by developing a comprehensive CCT model for multiple consensus groups and multiple latent traits based on continuous responses, ordered categorical responses, unordered categorical responses or mixtures thereof. The authors illustrate the model using both simulated and empirical memory test data. Model-based analyses are shown to recover data-generating parameters well.

In their subsequent contribution,  Oravecz and Vandekerckhove (2020)  elaborate on the extended Condorcet CCT model ( Oravecz, Faust et al., 2014; Oravecz, Vandekerckhove et al., 2014 ) by linking its consensus knowledge, guessing rate, and acquiescence bias parameters to dynamic process parameters from intensive longitudinal data in a joint latent variable model. This refined model is then applied to data of  Heshmati et al. (2019)  to study how subjective beliefs about what makes people feel loved are linked to actually feeling loved in everyday life.

The following articles by  Merkle, Saw, and Davis-Stober (2020)  and  Van den Bergh, Bogaerts, Spreen, Flohr, Vandekerckhove, Batchelder, and Wagenmakers (2020)  present models inspired by CCT, respectively, to optimize forecasts and to integrate ratings of clinicians referring to multiple criteria of patients’ mental health. The latter model actually is a generalization of the CCT model for ordinal data as proposed by  Anders and Batchelder (2015)  to handle (a) multiple patients simultaneously, (b) different latent constructs that affect multiple items, and (c) background information available for each patient and rater, respectively. Using simulations, the performance of this generalized CCT model for ordinal data is compared against the standard practice of aggregating raw ratings, highlighting the benefits of the CCT model.

Article 5 by  Schramm and Batchelder (2020)  generalizes CCT in yet another direction, namely, by analyzing group consensus underlying paired comparison judgments from a fixed set of alternatives. Building upon Thurstone’s Case III model, the Strong Consensus Paired Comparison Model assumes that all participants follow the same latent consensus dimension in their paired comparisons but with varying degrees of accuracy. The Weak Consensus Paired Comparison Model, in contrast, allows for some deviations from the latent consensus values in people’s average valuation of alternatives. A hierarchical Bayesian estimation framework is proposed for all model variants.

Articles 6 and 7 in the second special issue present nonstandard IRT models that can be linked to future CCT models.  Zeigenfuse, Batchelder, and Steyvers (2020)  propose an IRT model for matching tests in which for each test item – say, the first name of a famous actor – the matching response needs to be selected from a set of alternatives—say, the family names of a set of famous actors. Because responses to a test item depend on all other responses made, matching tests necessarily violate the local independence assumption underlying most IRT models. The authors therefore propose an alternative IRT model for matching tests, derive its item response function and its score distribution before they apply their model to matching test data.

In the subsequent article,  Haaf, Merkle, and Rouder (2020)  critically discuss existing IRT models that make strong a priori assumptions on whether items order versus do not order across the underlying trait dimension of interest. As an alternative, they propose two-parameter shift scale IRT models – particularly the two-parameter uniform – that can model either item ordering or violations of item ordering depending on the data that enter in the analysis. Using Bayes factor model comparisons, the question of whether items order or do not order can then be assessed empirically.

So far, neither the matching test IRT model ( Zeigenfuse et al., 2020 ) nor the two-parameter uniform shift-scale model ( Haaf et al., 2020 ) has been used in combination with CCT. However, it seems straightforward to incorporate these innovative IRT models into the CCT framework, at least conceptually. Such a fusion would open up the avenue for getting access to even more types of data for purposes of consensus analysis than was possible in the past.

Obviously, consensus analysis has become a very active and steadily expanding field of social and behavioral research that transcends the boundaries between anthropology, sociology, political science, and different branches of psychology. Even social network analysis – an apparently distinct field of sociological research with different aims (cf.  Kumbasar, Romney, & Batchelder, 1994 ) – can be linked to CCT as previously shown by  Batchelder, Kumbasar, and Boyd (1997) . The closing article by  Lee and Buts (2020)  highlights the benefits of CCT-inspired Bayesian Network Accuracy Models for survey-based research on social relationships. Using cross validation methodology based on different subsets of respondents, Lee and Buts show that informants’ reports on informal social relations in fact share a common mental model of social structure even though this consensus is only imperfectly reflected in their responses. Split-half reliabilities of estimated friendship relations in a social network calculated from disjoint sets of respondents were significantly higher than can be explained by chance, supporting the hypothesis that responses of different informants refer to the same underlying social reality.

In sum, just like research on MPT modeling, CCT research has become a highly influential, flourishing, and far-reaching branch of Cognitive Psychometrics, a development that was essentially triggered by the outstanding contributions of William H. Batchelder. We are confident that many more treasures are waiting to be raised in these fields, using further methodological improvements and innovative applications of Cognitive Psychometrics in the social, cognitive, and behavioral sciences.