10.1016/j.jmp.2021.102619
If decision-makers and end users do not understand your results, then your research is unlikely to have any real impact. This principle represents one of the greatest challenges in translational or applied research. Whereas the concern with theoretical investigations is languishing in unpublished or uncited obscurity, applied research needs to be more than just brilliant or practical—it needs to be communicated in such a way that the findings affect policy or procedure in the real world. The problem is particularly pervasive in military applications, where Hollywood-driven idioms create as much misinformation as reality regarding military operations. This tutorial is intended to provide some insight for applied researchers who seek to better communicate their findings to the decision-makers and end users who work in a military setting. The primary goals include identifying how to communicate mathematical psychology research to military decision-makers and how to use mathematical psychology to enhance limited amounts of data in military outcomes. Although many of these discussion points could apply to law enforcement and security personnel, military applications will be the primary focus here. For the key takeaways, there will be bullet point recommendations in the summary section for anyone who merely wants the highlights.

To provide context for this problem, consider the following example from military research. I once presented to an active duty military audience about making a proposed change to a training course. Inferential statistics were presented alongside the raw differences, including  p  values and an abnormally large effect size (Cohen’s  
                         
                            d 
                            > 
                            4 
                            . 
                            0 
                         
                      ). Rather than marvel at the statistical mic drop moment of an integer-sized Cohen’s  d  value, someone in the audience immediately commented that the difference was actually very large—not some (colorful language omitted) trivial “4”. The audience member had decades of military experience as a combat veteran and trained expert on our discussion topic, but no background in calculating effect sizes. He could appreciate the raw differences far better than the effect sizes I presented along with them. Even among professional organizations, only recently have some associated publishing outlets officially moved toward requiring effect sizes and power calculations in publications ( Morris & Fritz, 2017; Psychonomic Society, 2012 ). Moreover, there were remarkable variations in how I described the data originally compared to how the subject matter expert described the same data when he relayed the information to others. Fortunately, the findings spoke for themselves in this case and we agreed upon the conclusion, but this example stands as the exception, not the rule. The exchange became a learning experience all too common early in the career of a military scientist.

This anecdotal example also serves as a microcosm of another, larger problem. If the information is not presented in such a way that the audience can appreciate the proposed changes or potential impact, then there will be no push to adopt the changes and  potential  impact never becomes  actual  impact. For military researchers, this distinction taps into important professional implications as well. Tangible changes to military policy and procedures are the so-called “coin of the realm” for military scientists, whereas peer-reviewed publications and citations are coin of the realm in academic environments. The difference is not arbitrary, but rather temporal. That is, these communities are working on different parts of the problem at likely different points in development. The disconnect represents one of many problems in helping researchers understand the end users so that the research has better chance of transitioning to a real-world application (cf.  Şuşnea, 2012 ).

This implication raises another critical question: who is the end user? For military applications, the assumption might be that the individual soldier should be the end user or beneficiary. Another perspective could argue that the end user is a bureaucrat making acquisition decisions. Still another perspective could offer program managers as the end users because they approved the research and must relate the findings to military officials. The answer is all of the above. All these individuals are military end users because, for research products, end user describes the individual using the outcome of the research. In turn, considering the end user provides what is perhaps the best advice regarding the applied impact of the research—know your audience. They might be acquisition professionals deciding on which rifle to purchase or training instructors who must be persuaded that a novel training technique is a viable substitution for their courses. Here, the end user is conceptualized as a decision-maker who will have to choose a course of action based on the information provided by a research initiative. As such, the end user depends on the question posed by the research, and the researcher will therefore benefit from a better understanding of the decision to be made from the results of the research.

Although these ideas are easy to accept as a fundamental problem in military research, the question remains—how should the results be communicated so the end user will appreciate them? The current tutorial will be different from most things you read in mathematical psychology because you may already know advanced mathematical principles, procedures, and modeling techniques that can dramatically improve how decision-makers interpret research outcomes. The missing piece is how to adequately apply and convey this knowledge. As such, the tutorial will review several critical decision-making factors and simple mathematical modeling techniques to enhance the translational potential of applied military research. It is a starting point on which you can build and expand the value of your research within an applied domain. The discussion will begin with some insight into critical factors military decision-makers and military funding agencies use when making decisions. The goal is to provide amenable scientists with better tools for describing the importance or impact of their research to defense professionals. Even though these approaches should make academic and industry partners more successful in pursuing funding from military sources, the most important advantage should be a better means of relating empirical observations to program sponsors and the eventual military end users.

There are many different people involved in the chain stretching from research design to practical military uses of research outcomes. This entire procedure is formalized as the defense acquisition process. Because funding decisions involving billions of dollars are made through the acquisition pipeline, there are meticulously documented procedures, milestone decisions, and numerous criticisms for military acquisitions ( Berteau et al., 2010; Bolten et al., 2008; Fox, 2012; Rendon & Snider, 2019 ). Still, this method represents the formalized version of using research and development for military applications. It is good to be at least tangentially familiar with defense acquisitions because decisions made at the highest level will utilize this process. For researchers looking to conduct applied military research, there are also less formal principles that can be applied as best practices. Leveraging these ideas requires an understanding of how each person in the chain will view and utilize the information for different purposes.

Broadly, there are three types of people who will be involved in research applications: (1) the end user; (2) the funders; and, (3) the researchers themselves. The end users represent the military personnel who must make a decision based on the research outcomes. Research is intended to inform and support their decision-making process. Funding agencies and program managers act as the brokers on behalf of the military, aligning military needs with the available resources and emerging science. Sometimes funders are the end users, but usually for highly specific questions. Meanwhile, the researchers hold the reins for design and innovation.

The challenge is that each link in this chain will have different decisions and functions. All people involved will benefit from a better understanding of the other roles in the process. End users would benefit from advanced statistical knowledge, and funders benefit more as they understand the eventual applications. The latter point is why funding organizations often have former military personnel or even active duty military personnel occupy posts in the organization. End users and researchers would also benefit from cross-reading their professional outlets. End users may benefit from copies of published journal articles, and researchers would benefit from reading copies of  Proceedings of the Naval Institute  or  Marine Corps Gazette  if they hoped to reach a Navy or Marine Corps audience, respectively. Know the professional writings of your intended audience and it will help you understand them. Researchers may even consider publishing in professional military journals to increase both their visibility in those communities and their ability to communicate with these communities.

Here the intent is to provide some background to the information used by each member of the chain with a particular emphasis on providing information for research personnel. So, how do representatives from each part of the process view and utilize the information and opportunities presented to them?

A decision is going to be made . Although it seems somewhat obvious, this point is foundational for all military decision-makers. Money will be spent, equipment will be selected, servicemembers will be trained—all aspects that required decisions in appropriation, equipment testing, and training guidance. For example, someone must decide between two pieces of equipment to purchase, such as the M4 rifle versus the M27 rifle ( South, 2019 ), and whether the evidence supports a robust difference or no difference, someone must choose between them. The full decision will incorporate other factors sometimes less salient to empirical studies such as cost, equipment specifications, previously demonstrated field capabilities, or anecdotal field testing. The best-case scenario is to have empirical data collected by an independent entity without any conflict of interest, but whether the science is conclusive—or exists at all—someone is going to make a decision and take responsibility for it.

So, how do military decision-makers utilize the available information when there are known information gaps? The brief explanation involves a key principle in how military personnel are trained. Specifically, military professionals are taught risk management, not risk avoidance—that is, you enter every decision armed with the best, most complete information possible to maximize gains and minimize losses, but missions are not avoided merely because they might be dangerous. There is an entire series of instructions devoted to risk management that are publicly released and can be viewed online. In the U.S. Navy, the current procedural instruction is OPNAVINST3500.39D ( Chief of Naval Operations, 2019 ), which references that it is an instruction from the Chief of Naval Operations (OPNAVINST) and discusses naval operations and readiness (anything in the 3000 series of instructions). This process covers how military personnel evaluate behavioral decisions in light of known hazards and decide on the best course of action based on time critical factors. This principle applies in all aspects from planning special operations missions to crafting a funding portfolio. For example, when the only information available is a study that might have a small sample size or limited conclusions, academic researchers might reasonably make the argument that the evidence is inconclusive. Military decision-makers, however, must still decide on some course of action even if this limited evidence is the only evidence available.

Apply this abstract description to a more tangible example. For example, a military unit has a limited operations and maintenance budget to purchase night vision goggles (NVGs) for upcoming missions that could include close combat at night. Costs and technical specifications are often very precise when evaluating equipment, but the impact on human performance is not nearly so objective or readily available. A commander asks to see the evidence of how the two different NVG systems compare in their impact on human performance. Unfortunately, only two studies are found that utilized the NVGs in question: one study which used a college population to acquire a large sample size in a laboratory setting with a simplified reaction time task, whereas the other study evaluated live fire performance in a small sample of active duty military during a controlled field study that replicated some critical components of room clearing activities. The former study would be considered better scientifically given the greater experimental control and sample size sufficient to achieve requisite statistical power greater than 80%. Conversely, the latter study would be considered weaker scientifically because there is less experimental control and a sample size that might only achieve statistical power of supposedly 50%.

If these two studies were submitted to peer-reviewed journals for publication, it is likely that the laboratory study would be published in a much better journal and be considered the superior result. However, this presumed conclusion would be based upon important research concepts such as experimental control and statistical power. There could still be serious concerns about the lack of ecological validity in the task though given the non-military population and the laboratory task being so different from the combat operation it is supposed to influence. As such, the commander would likely place greater weight on the more ecologically valid task when making the decision despite the obvious weaknesses in experimental design. To that end, this example identifies how ecological validity in the task supersedes concerns about experimental control. Military end users are much more likely to value the evidence that more closely resembles the task they need to accomplish. Even if squeezing a trigger and pressing a button are both reaction time tasks, your military end users will have much greater respect as the research endeavors to emulate more realistic components of their performance than simple laboratory-based tasks. Assumptions can be dangerous in a combat setting, which is why the end users will likely accept the option that makes fewer assumptions.

In an effort to bridge the gap between uncertainty and risk management for the end user, mathematical psychologists might consider applying Bayesian methods to enhance their communications. After all, there is a natural connection between the way Bayesian methods can quantify uncertainty in general ( Xie et al., 2014 ) and the uncertainty inherent to military operations. Similar methods are already utilized in financial sectors as a method to quantify operational risk ( Alexander, 2000 ). However, Bayesian methods perfectly encapsulate the problem in communicating with the military end user. Consider the example of using a Bayes Factor to measure the strength of observed evidence ( Hoijtink et al., 2019; Morey & Rouder, 2011; Vanpaemel, 2010 ). This metric could provide insight into the strength of evidence rather than the probabilistic and binary interpretation of a hypothesis being supported or rejected. Still, mathematical psychologists could readily understand and appreciate Bayes Factors in statistical evidence. Military end users are unlikely to be aware of Bayesian methods or how to interpret them. In turn, the psychologist presenting results will need to explain what the numbers mean alongside presenting them. When the entire brief might only be a few slides long, or even bullet points within a slide, there is no opportunity to explain the information and the end user is unlikely to understand it without the explanation. A valuable statistical measure may inadvertently complicate the presentation. Granted, this argument is not trying to say Bayesian methods should not be used nor denying the immense value they add to statistical interpretations. The point is that the statistical inferences and modeling procedures will be perceived as methods. A best practice is to ensure that detailing the methods does not undermine the message when communicating with the end user.

Alternatively, think of the situation from the end user perspective. A researcher flashing seemingly endless statistics is going to seem more pedantic than practical. The end user will absolutely want to have data and concrete evidence to back up any decisions, but familiar evaluations may be favored over new metrics. Novel statistical methods and computational modeling might be scientifically valid, yet without the proper context, the effort will not reach its maximum potential. If you chose a novel method to present the information, be sure this novel approach also has a concise way to explain the bottom line. Specifically, why does this method matter, or what does presenting information in this way accomplish? If the new method inherently presents information in a military context, such as modeling simulations to convert statistical differences between groups into combat-related outcomes, then the new method has already accomplished this goal. If the new information or analyses do not immediately convey military meaning or applications, then have a plan to explain why this outcome has relevance. Consider the classic example of effect sizes (cf.  Cohen, 1992 ). If you present an effect size of Cohen’s  d  
                         
                            = 
                          0.50, this information will likely be presented alongside the typical guidance that a small effect is  d  
                         
                            = 
                          0.20, a medium effect is  d  
                         
                            = 
                          0.50, and a large effect is  d  
                         
                            = 
                          0.80. The metric cannot be explained to an audience without this context unless the audience already has advanced statistical knowledge. If you present a novel metric to a military audience, then you will also need to ensure that this explanation includes information that allows them to place the result into proper context and why the different technique was necessary.

More importantly, when evaluating metrics to present to end users, consider how they will view the information when deciding on what to present. The end user is going to have a focus that can be oversimplified as cause and effect. Namely, what will the impact be of making this decision? This high-level takeaway may be at odds with the often nuanced-driven focus of scientists explaining key details that led to the outcome. Bayesian inferences, computational modeling, and frequentist statistics are all perceived as details—important, all of them, but details nonetheless. The key concern will be demonstrating how the information leads to action. How does the information provided help lead to a decision, or what impact can this information have? Documenting actual impact after the decision becomes critical too as the end users will want to see the effect of their decisions.

As such, the evidence needs to be presented in a way that quantifies how it is going to be used and the impact it could have as much as the quality of evidence being presented. An end user wants to see information presented in a way they can understand with measures of how different decisions will impact operations. The applied challenge is how to synthesize high quality statistics with simplicity of presentation given that it is entirely possible a scientist may have only a few sentences to explain the results. Wasting effort on explaining what the explanation means is inherently redundant. Remember that military end users, especially higher in the chain of command, have critically intense schedules and many responsibilities. Your evidence must be distillable down into bullet points with supplementary materials that can defend the information presented.

There is an irony to presenting this point last in a section, but consider a common military idiom—BLUF, or Bottom Line Up Front. Military communications will commonly have a BLUF when the topic or discussion-to-follow is complicated. The BLUF relates the core point or takeaway as the first piece of the communication. It serves both the advantage of getting right to the point and providing the individual a concise takeaway that they can relate to others later. An abstract of an abstract presented on the title page. Be ready and able to give end users a BLUF as to why your research matters. You will better capture and retain their attention this way.

It is always important to consider how the end user will eventually use the research, procedures, or equipment in question. However, there is an obvious link between the researchers and end users via the funding organizations. A training battalion out of Marine Corps Base Quantico might eventually benefit from empirical research, although aside from perhaps being participants in data collection, they are not tasked with research program management and not the first point of contact for researchers. The critical link is the funding organization such as the Office of Naval Research, which is tasked to fund and direct research in support of naval operations. These organizations will have thorough contacts within the military or subject matter experts who are active duty servicemembers assigned to the research organization. More importantly, they act as a critical safeguard to preserve future military operations based upon the current investments made in research and development.

So, what do funding organizations consider when evaluating research? Broad Agency Announcements are notoriously vague, but these announcements are crafted in support of high-level military objectives that are not classified information. For example, the annual United States Department of Defense Budget for fiscal year 2019 was 686 billion dollars ( Department of Defense, 2018a ). The enormous expenditure comes with strategic rationale as presented to Congress when justifying this investment of public funds. Two high-level documents direct the use of these funds: National Defense Strategy ( Department of Defense, 2018b ), and National Defense Authorization Act. Military priorities are set forth in these documents, which will be taken as guidance throughout all levels of the military (see  Table 1 ). Other strategic documents inform operations from a narrow viewpoint through the various Service branches, such as the Army or the Navy. For example, the Navy takes direction from such documents as A Design for Maintaining Maritime Superiority ( Chief of Naval Operations, 2018 ). This separation is where it can be difficult to keep track of the various military instructions as each Service branch has a more specialized mission set further down the chain of command. There are various documents known from TRADOC in the Army (Training and Doctrine Command) or fragmentary orders known as FRAGO. Whereas the high-level documents apply to the entire military, TRADOC and FRAGO apply more selectively to the Service in question. Of all these military instructions, the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA; see  Table 1 ) may be the most critical to the funding agency because it actually assigns and allocates funding to different organizations.

For proposals to funding agencies, these guidance documents should be as critical to a literature review in a proposal for military funding as any seminal research in question. Moreover, they will help you craft a military relevance section, which should be one of the most critical pieces of any military funding proposal. Military guidance will comprise the 30,000-foot view of military operations, but many factors—including language, objectives, and buzzwords—will filter down through the ranks to every level of the military. In the case of individual military personnel, they will attempt to align their annual fitness reports (FITREPs) with this terminology when describing how their performance advances the mission as laid out in those directives, whereas program managers will attempt to align their program objectives with these same documents. Both are regularly released and updated, which is why researchers should always be checking that their reference information corresponds to the current or upcoming fiscal year.

The simplest application for researchers is that your funding pre-proposals and proposals should use the same language and objectives as the military guidance documents, citing them as prominently as seminal research studies. Think of it this way: if the people choosing whether or not to fund your study must align their entire portfolio with these goals, you can improve your chances of getting funded by explaining how your research will make progress toward these objectives. The alternative involves hoping your research might contribute toward something that eventually impacts military operations somewhere down the line—noting the layered contingencies inherent in that statement. A program manager must answer to someone higher up in their chain of command, and this program manager will benefit from demonstrating how his or her portfolio accomplishes the mission. By helping the program manager align with higher order instructions, such as the National Defense Strategy and National Defense Authorization Act, you are going to increase your chances of receiving funding in support of military research. Specifically, if your proposal does not include a military relevance section that references these documents or at least utilizes key buzzwords, then you are depriving the proposal of an easy opportunity to leap ahead of competing proposals. The best advice is to find the instructions that best correspond to the problem you wish to study, citing national-level defense instructions the way you would seminal studies and more specific guidance that directly addresses your topic as you would recent empirical studies.

As a final point on funding terminology, put in the extra effort to ensure you are using any buzzwords correctly. For example, you may have heard the term “anti-access/area denial”, or A2/AD. It references the ability to prevent an adversary from operating in a given area. Modern usage often described long-range precision strike capabilities or missile defense systems, although older interpretations could just as easily describe caltrops in cavalry warfare. The term A2/AD became a popular buzzword in the 2010s, and as happens with most buzzwords, it became overused. A2/AD became a one-size-fits-all term that meant anything to anyone, and the Chief of Naval Operations actively discouraged further use once the term fell into such ambiguity ( LaGrone, 2016 ). Researchers using the term in 2015 might have found success, but researchers in 2017 would have been out of luck. Terminology and priorities can shift quickly in military circles. Buzzwords may be important, but it is more important to use them correctly and avoid inviting criticism by opening a messy debate.

Notably, these guidance documents are specific to the military structure of the United States. Other countries have similar processes, although the underlying point remains the same. Each document represents a refined version of a higher-order instruction intended to inform daily operations. This cascading effect is the essence of strategic policy. No document or order truly exists in isolation—generals do not issue orders to privates. Instead, a general will issue a strategic order, which is in turn interpreted and implemented by a colonel, which is in turn interpreted and implemented by someone else and so forth until the product finally reaches the individual soldier. Whereas the specific military end user will operate at a particular echelon command, funding agencies differ because they operate at multiple levels. They will brief higher commanders while also often having some involvement with the individual units as participants in the studies. As such, funding agencies may not issue any of these guidance documents outside their Broad Agency Announcement or smaller grant opportunities, but these documents and operational needs will inform and guide their BAA. Determining why a funding agency chose particular areas of research for future investment will depend on the strategic vision of the military commands as outlined by these other documents.

Taking a step back, when asking what military funding organizations consider when evaluating research, the expectation was probably something regarding warfighter performance, marksmanship, or similarly classic military-relevant buzzwords. Other factors such as cost also make an impact, but the critical point is that military relevance often matters as much if not more than scientific advancement or financial cost. There is another obvious piece of evidence that your proposal should be tailored to the program in question. If you are presenting to someone whose portfolio involves artificial intelligence, then align it with components relevant to artificial intelligence from the guidance documents listed previously. Do not submit work about marksmanship to them unless it has some component of artificial intelligence. The same holds true for marksmanship or any other military topic—align your research objectives with the objectives of the program manager to whom you are submitting your proposal.

In this chain, the researcher has arguably the most challenging position. Military end users and funders are making choices on the information or proposals given to them. Researchers, on the other hand, have the more nebulous challenge of innovation. This role would be complicated enough if isolated only to finding a solution for a given problem. Instead, researchers must sometimes invent new methods while summarizing years of innovation into mere bullet points. Although this effort has many working parts, there are two major areas to discuss here that might help future endeavors before discussing how best to effectively communicate results: (1) the role of research in the acquisition process; and, (2) what role basic science contributions might have for military research. Communication strategies and specific methods will be discussed in Section  3 .

The first piece to understand is where research and development resides in the acquisition chain. Defense acquisition has several steps that have the following formalized order: (1) materiel solution analysis; (2) technology maturation and risk reduction; (3) engineering and manufacturing development; (4) production and development; and finally, (5) operations and support. Research and development plays its largest role in the early stages. For example, the goal of materiel solutions analysis is to recommend possible solutions that will require further development. Concepts of operations and identification of possible risk are critical functions that occur during the materiel solutions analysis. Research initiatives are crucial to identifying what might be possible or developing new designs for test and evaluation. Any research programs in this phase are largely exploratory. Next, technology maturation and risk reduction can utilize more tailored goals and objectives to explore which components of the possible program carry the greatest risk or require the most technological development. Ideas can be explored for possible solutions. The remaining phases tailor down the functions of research and development. Although there is a continuing role, the early stages of the acquisition process are where research and development initiatives have the greatest impact.

Of course, the defense acquisition process is a formal procedure. There is another classification of research used by the Department of Defense that, while still formal, is much less complex (see  Table 2 ). Its official purpose is to align research activities with available funds. These classifications are listed as 6.1 to 6.8 with the progression representing how the evolving research comes closer and closer to operations ( Sargent Jr, 2020 ). Each classification has parallels to National Science Foundation activity descriptions, although the DoD engages in more applied research. The funding descriptions are also not arbitrary. If you have a 6.1 project and apply for funding under a program that is 6.2–6.3, your project will not be funded. That said, the funding descriptions are guidelines, not hard and fast rules. A particular study can have basic science elements while also advancing toward applied goals, which might put the project into multiple categories.

Additionally, these budget classifications can help avoid problems by identifying what types of funding an institution can receive. Even if 6.5 or 6.8 funds are available that appear to align with the proposed research, not all universities or institutions can receive these types of grants or contracts. Defense institutions will often use the phrase “color of money” to refer to these differences, where some funds can only be used for procurement or construction. It is important to know how the funding available aligns with the intended use and what a given organization is capable of receiving and executing. Military organizations cannot use funds unless the intended purpose aligns with the proper “color” of money. A purple project needs purple dollars, and a blue project needs blue dollars—you cannot spend purple money on a blue project, and you cannot spend research and development money on a military construction project.

If not using budget activity classifications, another approach is to describe the work through Technology Readiness Level (TRL; see  Table 3 ). These terms provide a framework for describing everything from basic science to fully implemented technology proven effective on actual missions. Moreover, these technology evaluations can be similarly adopted to knowledge products, except that they are referred to as Knowledge Readiness Levels (KRLs).

For researchers, there is a major question as to how theoretical research might fit into military initiatives. Advances in theory or modeling techniques may not have empirical findings or a clear link to military operations. However, not all research needs to be immediately applicable to be militarily relevant. Not everything needs to be squad tactics or weapon systems for military funding agencies to see value in the work. For example, selecting among various computational models of cognition can produce methodological advances in determining goodness of fit ( Pitt & Myung, 2002; Pitt et al., 2002 ). The individual effort could potentially have military applications down the line, which requires seeing beyond an individual effort.

Methodological development and basic science advances need to be framed with this future application in mind. If the immediate effort will not change operations, then the effort must be framed as to how it could eventually transition into practical applications. Specifically, what is your 10 to 15 year plan for this research to enhance military operations? The approach may sound like a burden, but the value is having a strategic vision—not in single-handedly assuming responsibility for its full execution. This larger plan could inspire additional funding and effort from other organizations, or at a minimum, demonstrate to military personnel that you are keeping their future in mind while planning the current efforts. Not every effort needs to have an immediate application, but every military effort should have some future state where it impacts military operations. The ability to lay out this vision will help your future success and project planning.

Determining better fit procedures for cognitive modeling suddenly becomes more valuable when these methodological advances can be linked to decision support systems that will deliver optimal information to operators in real time. The problem is not in describing how the research will produce a cognitive model, human performance application, or widget that will change military operations today. The problem is in having the ability to articulate a pathway for basic science initiatives to yield practical military applications at some future date. Military personnel are highly accustomed to long-term planning. Do not undervalue the capability to see years into the future, knowing that layered investments might be necessary to yield the intended benefit. Instead, the onus is on the researcher to layout a long-term plan that will yield eventual military benefits. If this plan is not carefully reasoned in advance, or if the plan cannot actually articulate a military benefit, then the likely reason is a lack of vision, lack of planning, and yes, lack of military application. The latter is unlikely given the phenomenally diverse set of mission responsibilities undertaken by military operations from close combat operations to telecommunications to humanitarian intervention. In short, there is a clear role for basic science research as well as theory and modeling initiatives to be supported in military research, although the researcher will have to invest time developing a long-term plan that could eventually produce military applications.

So, what would a project look like with both basic science implications and military applications, and how would you evaluate the funding category to which the application should belong? One example is the intersection exploring inhibitory control and shoot/don’t-shoot decision-making. Preliminary evidence demonstrated a relationship poor inhibitory control and a higher likelihood of inflicting an unintended casualty ( Biggs & Pettijohn, 2021; Wilson et al., 2015, 2013 ). Cognitive enhancement initiatives extended this evidence by demonstrating that inhibitory control training could reduce the likelihood of firing on unarmed targets ( Biggs et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2019 ). This combined evidence creates an intersection between identifying inhibitory control abilities and a military application for this cognitive capability in shoot/don’t-shoot decision-making. Someone wanting to work in this space could pitch a project as refining inhibitory control assessments such as stop signal reaction time tasks (cf.  Verbruggen & Logan, 2008a, 2008b ) with either a more precise measure or a method that requires fewer trials during the assessment. Other modeling efforts could layer on subjective elements of decision-making into the inhibitory control paradigm as a stronger parallel to a shoot/don’t-shoot decisions.

These examples would constitute basic sciences or 6.1 initiatives that focus solely on the inhibitory control measurement while acknowledging the potential military applications of the research. For example, large scale military assessments create a logistical burden, and using fewer trials will make it easier to administer such assessments. So, the basic science or 6.1 elements of the project could be about attaining a more accurate assessment of inhibitory control from a stop signal task by using a method that requires fewer raw trials. There is still a clear military application, but the entire project can be about refinements to the stop signal task or a go/no-go task. The project enters the 6.2–6.3 range when it incorporates training elements or more realistic shooting assessments into the project. As for its classification, the approach could fall in either 6.1, 6.2, or 6.3 depending on where the bulk of the effort falls or the activity that falls furthest along the development timeline. It could be pitched as a 6.1 effort if the bulk of research activities fall into inhibitory control modeling, or it could be pitched as a 6.3 effort if the inhibitory control modeling is only to develop a task that can be used to predict use-of-force errors during military training exercises. There is some inherent flexibility in the system. Still, the primary takeaway for researchers should be aware of the funding agency or program to which they are submitting. If you submit a 6.1 project to a 6.5 funding line, you will fail no matter how good the proposal might be. Remember the intent of the funding and its budget classification when crafting your proposal.

For purely theoretical research, consider the concept of 6.0 classification. This category does not exist in DoD circles, but it should help draw the line between what is considered basic science research in military circles. If you have placed no thought or emphasis in design or interpretation as to how your research might have military implications, then it would be 6.0 research—truly basic or theoretical science without any military applications. One example might be exploring new animal species from the Amazonian jungle. There is no inherent military advantage to this research, and it would be considered 6.0. However, if you are looking for venomous snakes, and you can link the exploration to the development of antivenom or if snake bites are a significant military issue for deployments to tropical zones, you have successfully transitioned into 6.1 research. There is no expectation that the 6.1 basic science project will immediately yield a military application on conclusion. Even so, there is a pathway to develop a solution, product, or information that could help military operations. Making that connection to a military application is what shifts a project from 6.0 to 6.1. The tangible product will be a military relevance and significance statement, which should appear in all proposals for military research.

The remainder of the tutorial will address more specifics, but there are several important aspects to consider about communication across this spectrum of researcher—program manager—end user. Good advice comes from another area of study about communicating with stakeholders ( Parnell & Bresnick, 2013 ). Specifically, researchers should provide insights and not the details of the analysis. The researcher challenge is not to skimp on any evidence or labors in the process, but when presenting information to a decision-maker, remain focused on the higher insights from the research. The desire will be to delve deep into nuance and demonstrate the inner workings of the effort, but presenting the final information may be limited to highlights—an abstract of an abstract. It is a delicate line to walk given that the goal is to communicate insights and present information without making it appear as though the research conclusion has already made the decision.

Moreover, a key takeaway for communication in research should be to know your audience. This approach matters because how the research team will deliver information is a crucial step in the process. Communication strategies will need to differ slightly between end users, who are looking to consume the products of any research effort, and program managers, who might be looking to support new ideas. The direct approach would be to emphasize what is known or applicable when dealing with the end user versus emphasizing potential future avenues of exploration when dealing with the program manager. Although there is value in this oversimplification, it does undercut the value in communicating the tangible effects of the research applications if utilized today. Program managers will be eager to see their funded studies having a real-world impact. So, do not assume the program manager has no intent or interest in quantifying the products of the research—if anything, they may be more motivated to quantify the practical consequences of the research for summary and presentation in their internal reports. Perhaps the key difference will be the higher likelihood of scientific acumen in the program office than with the end users. This difference should flavor the type of language and the information that enters a concise summary. Consider it similar to giving a poster at a large conference. Not everyone who approaches has the same experience with the research topic, nor the same time to devote to the presentation. A critical factor to your success in communicating will be how well you identify the time and expertise in the target audience.

Knowing what information to present is only half the battle. Knowing how to present the information is every bit as important, and here is where mathematical psychology can truly revolutionize military research. Military doctrine and guidance can provide high level objectives, but they cannot describe the potential impact of individual performance initiatives. In lieu of concrete data, the decision will likely be left to the best available subject matter experts who weigh the options and debate the merits for various courses of action. These individuals are usually appointed to positions in higher echelon commands and given charge of writing doctrine for their respective Service. They will be responsible for evaluating the topic in question based on either their own professional experience or the data available to them. Data is always the preferred option because it represents specific performance metrics and objective data can be less vulnerable to subjective bias. The problem is that data may not be as readily available while opinions are almost universally plentiful.

When data is available, however, there are two primary problems that arise: (1) poor understanding of the critical tasks, and (2) poor communication of the results. Scientists need an understanding of the basic tasks being conducted by the end users, or the studies they design will lack sufficient ecological validity to be appreciated by anyone with relevant experience in the field. This problem is one of experimental design rather than specific to the data, but it does affect how data will be interpreted. There is absolutely an opportunity to utilize advanced computational modeling techniques to map out the thought processes behind a decision in addition to the speed or accuracy with which a decision is made. The larger untapped opportunity for mathematical psychology and computational modeling techniques is within the communication of the results. Many scientific reports leave the findings at the inferential statistics and likely a comparison or effect size to communicate the relative importance of any observed differences. This communication can be taken a step further by utilizing the raw data to conduct simple probabilistic modeling techniques and put the outcomes into verbiage and conclusions more appreciable by the end users. In this way, the raw data remain the same, but mathematical psychology can resoundingly impact how much that raw data is appreciated based on how it is communicated to the critical decision-makers and end users. Rather than say shooters performed better with one rifle on average, computational models could simulate squad-on-squad engagements and provide insight as to the combat advantage of fielding one rifle over another. Modeling procedures thus can take simple statistics and translate them into projected impact on operations. So, what are similar opportunities for mathematical psychology to enhance military research?

Data communication principles have been discussed in the abstract throughout. Now, it is time to provide tangible metrics to this bare bones idea. The continuing example will include marksmanship as a quantifiable and immediately applicable military measurement. Subsequent pieces will build upon marksmanship by demonstrating how the simple analysis can evolve and produce more comprehensive analyses.

In this example, consider the previous instance where the military was trying to decide which rifle to purchase for the infantry. Recent initiatives have explored purchasing more than 120,000 weapons for the Army ( South, 2020 ). The price tag for the first 4000 units is approximately $36 million, and so it is not hyperbole to say this issue is a billion-dollar deal. Careful consideration will be given to the various options through the defense acquisition process ( Department of Defense, 2015 ). The defense acquisition process is sometimes considered to apply only to large-scale, joint programs such as the multi-billion dollar development of the F-35 fighter ( Gertler, 2009, 2012 ). However, the process can apply to a variety of different programs with different scales, albeit some steps become less cumbersome as zeros are removed from the final budget. Research and development initiatives will most impact the early stages of this process, especially if the efforts are psychological in nature. Specifically, studies can affect what goes into the initial capabilities document (ICD; see  Fig. 1  or the materiel solution analysis.

During the research and development phase, the goal is obvious: you are trying to determine which rifle is better. There are two problems. First, what data do you collect to determine whether the rifles are different? Second, how do you present this information to the generals who will make the final decision? To avoid any potential conflicts about specific firearms makers, for the following examples, assume that Rifle A is superior to Rifle B and the difference between them can be expressed either as a very small effect ( 
                            
                               d 
                               = 
                               0 
                               . 
                               2 
                            
                         ) or a very large effect ( 
                            
                               d 
                               = 
                               0 
                               . 
                               8 
                            
                         , ( Cohen, 1992 ). This scenario will form the basis for the subsequent comparison techniques.

Marksmanship is an obvious dependent variable to evaluate rifle performance. Even so, this topic is not as straightforward as it might seem. The debate about proper military marksmanship assessments has as much depth and discussion as determining sample size or replicability issues in psychological studies ( Button et al., 2013; Gelman & Carlin, 2014; Hedge et al., 2018; Kravitz et al., 2020; Open Science Collaboration, 2015 ). Each Service branch has different performance standards determined by different marksmanship tests comprised of different drills. Moreover, there are different facilities available to different units that might have someone qualifying small arms proficiency while shooting simulated distance indoors versus actual distance outside on a flat range where weather is an issue. For people in the Navy, it is further complicated by weapons training sometimes occurring during deployment ( Veloicaza, 2015 ), meaning that Sailors might have to conduct their marksmanship qualification while maintaining balance aboard a ship at sea.

When designing the marksmanship test for data collection, there are almost limitless combinations of drills, target types, and distances from which to choose. The combinations would almost certainly raise questions about validity or similar criticisms. One approach is therefore to build upon what the end user already knows. For example, the Marine Corps has a Combat Marksmanship Program with pre-determined instructions and marksmanship drills ( Marine Corps Order 3574.2L, 2014 ). If Marines are to be the end users, then they are going to better appreciate the differences in performance if the test is built around their current procedures. They would readily acknowledge performance differences due to different rifles since the interpretation is already in a context they could appreciate. Furthermore, there would be existing data for comparisons from previous marksmanship drills. According to the program, an “expert” shooter scores an aggregate of 305–350 on combined  Tables 1 and 2  scores, a “sharpshooter” scores between 280–304, and a “marksman” scores between 250–279. Anything below 250 would receive an “unqualified” designation.

If 100 Marines score an average of 270 points with Rifle B (pooled variance 30 points), then a small effect of Rifle A would raise their score to an average of 276 points and a large effect would raise their score to 294 points. The latter could be better described as shifting the company average from marksman to sharpshooter, which would be a phenomenal upshift. Another description would be that, depending on variance within the unit, 19% of shooters were unqualified and 12% were experts with Rifle B, whereas 5% of shooters were unqualified and 44% were experts with Rifle A. These descriptions add critical context to the value of the different rifles. An additional 30% of shooters qualifying expert due to equipment would be a dramatic shift in performance.

It is one approach among many, but the critical distinction is that the information remains the same;  how  the effect is described has changed. The latter description shifted an effect size measurement into a military context that better applies to marksmanship performance evaluations. If the data were described to senior leadership as a large effect size of Cohen’s  
                            
                               d 
                               = 
                               0 
                               . 
                               8 
                            
                          versus a 32% increase in expert rifle qualifiers, it becomes easy to see which description would be better received. In short, the example illustrates an important principle in presenting applied research—if you have to explain what your numbers mean to the audience after showing them the numbers, then you have not conveyed your results using the best option available. This possibility does not build upon the many ways mathematical modeling might contribute to a more comprehensive analysis, but it does demonstrate the communication challenge of effectively conveying group differences.

Despite the named advantages, the existing marksmanship test might not be an option for multiple logistic reasons such as comparing results from different facilities with different supporting distances for firing lines. Here is where the simple communication approach from the preceding section falls apart because the inherent operational answer will be that marksmanship performance is not truly comparable at different distances. As such, there needs to be some modeling solution to communicate and compare results under different circumstances.

To begin, marksmanship tends to follow a non-linear function—that is, performance drops off exponentially and not linearly as distance increases. You could assign a required accuracy or time standard based on the unit needs, or an  effective engagement distance.  For example, assume an individual Marine must be able to fire a lethal round at a given target within 60 s. The shooting exercises can be designed around this standard with different distances set. Plot three or more shooting distances as assessments with the maximum range of the rifle as the final plot point intersecting with the  
                            x 
                         -axis of distance and the  
                            y 
                         -axis representing accuracy. By plotting out the curve, you could estimate accuracy at a variety of given distances. The requisite accuracy, such as 50% or 75%, becomes the cross-section. If the curve would project 50% accuracy within 60 s at a distance of 100 m, then 100 meters becomes the effective engagement distance with the given rifle. This data presentation requires some control over the shooting scenarios, although it remains an example of how to present the data.

The effective engagement distance offers several advantages. There are no unified marksmanship standards given the variance across Services or even sometimes between units within a Service. Establishing an effective engagement distance gives a tangible example for demonstration. The distance, accuracy, speed, and so forth may be arbitrary, but they are clearly defined. If an individual wishes to argue against your interpretation, the standards can be augmented prior to the test or another point on the curve selected to define effective engagement distance. In this case, it would be ideal to consult with the training cadre of instructors responsible for marksmanship to confirm the evaluation. Distance is just another dependent variable, but it is appreciable, quantifiable, and differentiating between performance becomes simpler, especially when the performance concern is an equipment-related difference. Even if someone would like to argue the evaluation process was arbitrary, it remains a process with excellent documentation and high transparency. These factors will ensure any follow-up conversations are concrete and productive, which was a primary goal of collecting empirical data in the first place.

Whereas the first example (Section  3.2 ) changed how results were communicated by putting the outcomes in more military relevant terms, using non-linear plots and modeling provides another, albeit also simplistic approach to communicating more effectively. Here, mathematical modeling solved the problem of comparing across multiple distances. The core premise remains largely the same—how to effectively communicate results collected from existing data. The method has changed by demonstrating how plots and illustrative modeling can provide clear and concise interpretations. Show them data curves and give them options to select what they deem to be the most important aspects of performance or what the tolerable levels of confidence will be. Next, there is the best opportunity for mathematical psychology to support military research by truly evolving simple statistics into complex modeling procedures that might better support decision-making.

For all these methods of measuring or providing a quantifiable metrics, there is an important element missing from these assessments—competition. Military marksmanship is conducted against an adversary, and while an individual score makes significant progress in objective evaluation, a combat engagement does require comparison between at least two forces and not the evaluation of a single statistic. This comparison opens numerous modeling opportunities as a means to convey results as more than just the group with Rifle A outperformed the group with Rifle B. If the data is collected with appropriate granularity, the advantage of a rifle can be expressed to decision-makers as increased chances of winning a gunfight. Specifically, it is possible to compare performance in speed and accuracy such that an outcome is determined even from live fire exercises without risking the safety of personnel involved. This possibility also demonstrates how mathematical psychology can contribute to design and development of military assessments. If the marksmanship test does not produce outcomes that contribute to a simulation of the intended performance, it becomes evidence of limitations in the course of fire. Instructors are not collecting the information they need, and they may instead be reliant upon drills with fewer combat applications. The latter might be indicative of a drill designed purely for range safety evaluations, which would be more appropriate in a shooting course for a concealed carry license rather than a combat infantry marksmanship assessment.

Modeling efforts can also help decision-makers by taking a potentially large number of variables and distilling this raw information into the most critical decision point—will it help personnel win a combat engagement? This example provides the essence of effective communication with military decision-makers. Calculations, theory, and other methodology can all be documented, and all necessary scientific rigor remains a part of the analysis. Still, the final information is presented in a concise statement that quantifies the performance advantage. Decision-makers can then decide if the monetary investment into a given weapon system is worth the benefit it will provide.

One proposed solution is to use Monte Carlo simulations as a means to evaluate combat effectiveness differences between the two rifles ( Biggs & Hirsch, 2021 ). This simulation technique is not the only one that could be applied, although for the sake of this demonstration, the discussion will be limited to Monte Carlo simulations rather than similar modeling or bootstrapping techniques. A Monte Carlo simulation is a simple technique to calculate risk and outcomes in a wide variety of scenarios from basketball shooting ( Min, 2016 ) to the efficacy of weapon systems ( Chusilp et al., 2014; Hu & Wang, 2013 ). The method essentially uses inherent randomness and probabilistic sampling in associated variables to represent risk and variability with the problems. In business, the method can be used to calculate risk among investment and earnings based on lower and upper boundaries of expectations. However, the technique has not been applied to lethality despite the inherent value in using expected variability to simulate a combat engagement. That is, marksmanship scores can provide speed and accuracy means as well as standard deviations to represent expected variability around the mean or median performance parameters. This approach takes advantage of variability not often included in a marksmanship evaluation, particularly where speed is concerned. It essentially provides a precision-like variable to parallel group sizes in accuracy.

A Monte Carlo simulation uses this variability to depict how performance inconsistencies impact the likelihood of a given outcome. Speed and accuracy are sampled from the same drill and normal distributions are created around these variables. Four possible outcomes are assigned based on the relationships between speed and accuracy. If only one shooter is accurate, that shooter automatically wins regardless of speed—making two default outcomes Shooter A wins and Shooter B wins. If neither shooter is accurate, the result is a non-lethal draw where no lethal wounds are inflicted. If both shooters are accurate with nearly identical times, the result would be a lethal draw as both shooters successfully eliminate their opponent at the cost of their own life. This potential overlap is called a latency parameter and depends largely upon human motor responses and distance traveled by the round, making a latency parameter likely to be less than 500 ms in virtually all contexts even for distances past 500 m. These results effectively build upon accuracy to determine the outcome. However, this approach can make use of the speed variable by taking any instance where both shooters would have fired a lethal round and using speed as the tie-breaker variable to determine which shooter will win. Based on these criteria, the 4 outcomes would be: (1) Shooter A wins; (2) Non-lethal draw; (3) Lethal draw; and, (4) Shooter B wins. Next, due in large part to being probabilistic sampling, a large number of comparisons can be simulated from raw data to produce a more reliable estimation. The outcome distribution provides an appreciable result described in lethality rather than pure marksmanship performance.

For example, consider the 3 simulations in  Fig. 2 . The first simulation compares two shooters based on speed and accuracy data, where one shooter is slower, but more accurate. Despite their differences in speed and accuracy for the drill, neither shooter truly has a significant combat advantage. That is, their chances of winning the gunfight are nearly identical. The second simulation compares what happens when the faster shooter has a 10% increase in accuracy for the drill, which produces an expected increase in their chances of winning the gunfight. A 1% disadvantage becomes a 13% advantage. Finally, the third simulation then compares what happens if both shooters have the same accuracy, but the second shooter maintains the speed advantage. There is a notable increase in overall chances to win the gunfight, but it is still nowhere near a guarantee. These simulations could be conducted for any marksmanship drill and used to compare lethality performance from range-based behaviors even if live ammunition is used. Their advantage is to demonstrate the relativism inherent to any lethality measure and use variability as a source of information about performance. The end result is something far more practical to an operational community than a 0.5 s speed difference on a given drill—namely, this approach converts pure performance scores into your chances of engaging a hostile force and winning. Simulating a squad-on-squad engagement with multiple shots is the product of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo, where individual events are still sampled from probabilistic distributions while taking previous outcomes into account. These individual advantages are compared and many times over as multiple individuals engage one another rather than a single one-on-one shooter dynamic.

Now apply this technique specifically to the rifle effectiveness example. The assumption was either a small benefit ( 
                            
                               d 
                               = 
                               0 
                               . 
                               2 
                            
                         ) or a large benefit ( 
                            
                               d 
                               = 
                               0 
                               . 
                               8 
                            
                         ). If these benefits were applied to hypothetical means and standard deviations for speed (M  
                            = 
                          10 s, SD  
                            = 
                          2.5 s) and accuracy (M  
                            = 
                          60%, SD  
                            = 
                          15%), then the better rifle could be expressed in speed and accuracy as a small effect (Mean speed  
                            = 
                          9.5 s, Mean accuracy  
                            = 
                          63%) or a large effect (Mean speed  
                            = 
                          8.0 s, Mean accuracy  
                            = 
                          72%).

These broad differences would be impressive on their own, but now translate these factors into a Monte Carlo simulation. One hundred thousand samples could be conducted by random sampling of normal distributions created around these performance metrics. Then, the accuracy and speed information can be used to determine which of the four outcomes occurred for each simulation: Shooter A wins, Non-lethal draw, Lethal draw, or Shooter B wins. The combat advantage would be demonstrated in the difference in percentages between when Shooter A wins versus when Shooter B wins. Comparing performance between shooters using these rifles and a small effect, the shooter with the better rifle would have a 7.27% increased chance of winning the gunfight (46.24% for Shooter A versus 38.97% for Shooter B). This same comparison would yield a 30.29% increased chance of winning a gunfight with a large effect (59.49% for Shooter A versus 29.20% for Shooter B).

These descriptions change how the results might be interpreted. A 30% chance of winning a fair gunfight due to a rifle would not be a small difference—that much of an advantage would almost immediately disqualify any other rifle from consideration. The true advantage of the simulation technique is that accuracy and speed differences could be expressed as a combat advantage. Rather than arbitrary weighting of speed over accuracy through points, the simulation outcome concretely conveys the advantage without an arbitrary designation. This presentation better fits the intended purpose of the evaluation and will be more appreciable to a decision-maker.

The final consideration in Monte Carlo simulations involves the level of detail addressed by the simulation. Like any modeling attempt, the process is only as accurate as the information entered into it. This accuracy method presumed steel targets for which hit-or-miss accuracy would be the only outcome, which is a common enough approach in marksmanship, especially at greater distances. Point scoring and multi-shot engagements can be layered onto this method as additional complexities, or multiple shooters could likewise be taken into account. The underlying principle is that a Monte Carlo simulation uses the relativism inherent in lethality and the variability inherent in performance not as challenges of a performance evaluation, but as key points of data in making a lethality assessment. A key consideration becomes how complex to make the simulation. Monte Carlo techniques have been applied to complicated issues, such as safety risk assessment ( Blom et al., 2006 ) or advanced physics ( Troyer & Wiese, 2005 ). Highly complex interactions can be achieved through transition states and the use of Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulations ( Brooks et al., 2011; Geyer, 1992; Gilks et al., 1995 ). However, the primary goal should not be arbitrary complexity, but rather ensuring the outcome can be expressed clearly and concisely. Even if the best option requires a complex solution, you still need a straightforward way to describe the results. Describing the results in terms of a quantifiable combat advantage helps immensely with clarity.

Of course, a Monte Carlo simulation is only one of many possible variants. There are many similar and superior computational modeling methods that might further benefit interpretations. The most obvious examples might be using Bayesian methods to quantify uncertainty, or drift diffusion modeling efforts to better quantify decision-making. Still, the point is that simulation techniques and mathematical psychology modeling allow researchers to leverage existing data to produce higher quality inferences that might inform decision-making processes. Monte Carlo simulations merely have an advantage in leveraging a small amount of data to reach a larger conclusion.

The question becomes how far the data can be pushed before the data and conclusions from the simulation are invalid? It is a great question—and, unfortunately, one without an equally great answer. Instead, remember that presenting data to a military decision-maker is about quantifying risk and providing the best possible interpretation. Identify where there are unknowns and where assumptions are being made. Operational risk management teaches military personnel about weighing risk under conditions of uncertainty. The goal is not a rigorous and conclusive scientific finding for publication in a peer-review journal. The goal is to enable the best possible decision under the circumstances, knowing full well that not all information will be available. Again, a decision is going to be made. Research and data are intended to inform that decision with the most reliable and objective information available.

Money is the obvious factor not addressed thus far. One product, service, or process might be better, but is the cost worth the investment? Is 50% better rifle worth purchasing if you can only purchase half the amount? The role of mathematical psychology is to support the cost–benefit comparison by modeling the potential trade-offs and help design the experiments ( Fuguitt et al., 1999 ). Ideally, the goal is to design a test that produces measurable costs and benefits which reduce any potential or perceived role of bias in the decision-making process. Often, the trade-off can be presented as the human performance benefit or other operational enhancement given some dollar investment. Measuring human performance is where the design must excel because these measurements must adequately capture the relative value of any equipment, product, or service. The example is another extension of marksmanship, only the variables and equipment have changed. To demonstrate this point, there is a very tangible example.

Night vision goggles (NVGs) can substantially impact performance during military exercises ( Angel, 2004a, 2004b, 2005; Angel et al., 2005; Angel & Massel, 2005 ). Field of view is a critical issue that can impact operational performance ( Boff & Lincoln, 1988 ), yet field of view with modern NVGs are generally restricted between 30°-40° ( Craig & Geiselman, 1998; L-3 AN/PVS-31 BNVD, 2018 ). This field is common with binocular NVGs or “dual tubes”. However, recent advances introduced a multi-tube setup that could produce panoramic vision using four image intensifier tubes, or “quad tubes” that produce a 97°–100° field of view ( Craig, 1999; Craig et al., 1997; Marasco & Task, 1999; Van Arsdel et al., 2006 ). The catch is the pricetag, which can be above $40,000—easily two to ten times more expensive than alternative binocular models. Military units must make the decision about whether the increased field of view is worth the higher cost. So, how do they decide?

Here is where experimental design can make a difference. The goal should be to provide quantifiable information so that the cost–benefit analysis has tangible options to weigh rather than abstract principles.  Give a decision-maker information, but do not attempt to make the decision for them.  It might be obvious that one device has a better impact on performance at half the cost of a competitor, but if you get caught up in claiming one device is superior to another, you could be perceived as biased. Another possibility is that the researcher may perceive the value of certain information or performance elements differently than the military unit based on a narrow view of the possible uses (cf.  Bernabo, 1995 ). For example, aviators may want greater resolution or benefit from better signal detection in the periphery so that they can see more of the sky, whereas close combat units engaging in direct action will need to locate the target faster upon entering a room. One unit thus would prefer accuracy and signal detection, whereas the other would emphasize speed. Another unit may also have much more money to spend on equipment, such as special operations, and might see a given trade-off for expensive equipment as worthwhile when general purpose forces might not. The role of the researcher is to collect evidence in such a way that the unit can appreciate the outcome. Ideally, any experimental results should be presented as objective and unbiased measurements that demonstrate a potential benefit given a cost according to a clearly stated set of factors. Objective neutrality and unimpeachable evidence should be the hallmarks of good research initiatives.

This example is also not hypothetical. My colleagues and I once worked with a unit pressed with this very question: do they purchase enough of one type of NVG for every man in the unit, or do they purchase the more expensive NVG and only have enough for half? The latter can still be a serviceable solution depending upon their needs and deployment cycle, accounting too for the challenge of replacing units. Our role was to provide a human performance answer so that the group commander could make an informed decision. This information would also be the difference between this commander justifying the determination based on financial information or intuition alone. We needed something real—something with operational impact—to help him justify the choice.

As such, we provided a scientific demonstration based upon field of view (see  Hamilton et al., 2020 ). The analysis divided the target acquisition into several pieces: visual sweep to see whether increased peripheral information would help with single target acquisition, peripheral target acquisition to see how the wider field of view would help an operator account for uncertainty, and shoot/don’t-shoot decision-making to see if the difference went beyond simply acquiring the target and affected the decision to fire. Altogether, by careful control, we provided a combined estimate based on these different abilities and how they would impact different combat scenarios. The final conclusion favored the panoramic NVGs in terms of performance as the estimate indicated these NVGs could help an operator find and fire upon a hostile target more than 1.25 seconds than the narrow field of their binocular counterparts ( Hamilton et al., 2020 ). Conservatively, knowing the potential for diminishing returns when cognitive processes were combined, the final estimation to the unit recommended one second or better target acquisition during a close combat scenario.

A unit specializing in close combat can appreciate that difference far better than a research team—but that was the point. We were not there to make the decision for the commander, nor truly to make a recommendation. Our role was to quantify the cost/performance trade-off and let the commander decide if the improved performance was worth the added cost. We could have designed the experiments differently, emphasized different components, but our analyses were intended to compare the performance benefit due to field of view and provide a better answer for this situation.

This tutorial covered several issues surrounding military research. As promised in the introduction, here are the 10 key takeaways for anyone looking to conduct military research:

1. 
                            
                               
                                  Bottom Line Up Front (BLUF) 
                               
                            
                            Senior military personnel are likely to be exceptionally busy people. You may not have time to motivate methods and explain all details behind a decision. Many situations will call for presenting a single-sentence result or recommendation with supporting material made available afterward or elsewhere. A common military idiom is the BLUF, or Bottom Line Up Front. The first sentence of an e-mail or presentation gives the conclusion or purpose right away, and as the details become more complicated, the BLUF becomes more important. Be able and willing to present the bottom line or key takeaway as the very first thing when presenting to a military audience. 
                         
                         
                            2. 
                            
                               
                                  Understand the target audience and how the research will be used. 
                               
                            
                            Your research is being done for a purpose. Even if the goal is to invent a completely new process or procedure, there is a decision to be made or a process to be replaced. Researchers may need to adjust a communication strategy to involve more theory versus pure application when speaking to a program manager versus an end user. The research outcome will also benefit from your better understanding of how the research will be used. Military decision-makers love using data-based approaches because data further quantifies and justifies their own decision-making process when their superiors inevitably ask why. Program managers are not the end of the chain—there is always a bigger fish. 
                         
                         
                            3. 
                            
                               
                                  Understand that some decision must be made. 
                               
                            
                            Many conclusions come with the caveat that “more research is needed”. The statement is a truism, but in a military context, the phrase is especially useless. Some decision is going to be made from military research. Missions are planned on the premise of operational risk management, not risk avoidance. Even if there are lingering questions, some action needs to be taken, and actionable outcomes from the research are more valuable to the military than publishing in a high impact journal. Present your findings in a way that will best supplement the decision to be made or the action to be taken. 
                         
                         
                            4. 
                            
                               
                                  Provide the information to make a decision—do not make a decision for them. 
                               
                            
                            There is a fine line to walk when presenting data or conducting research. Data and evidence should be presented in an unbiased way, and while concise statements or recommendations are important, the goal should be to provide context and information to key decision-makers without attempting to make the decision. Often, there are performance/cost trade-offs, and the goal is to present the contrast in terms that can be readily understood. Different military units will place different importance on different aspects, and if you try to make the decision on their behalf, you may inadvertently assign priorities differently than its members would. The goal should be to quantify risk, benefit, and uncertainty that support decision-making. 
                         
                         
                            5. 
                            
                               
                                  Risk mitigation is a core aspect of military decisions—and a core opportunity to quantify uncertainty with mathematical models! 
                               
                            
                            Military decision-makers will understand that nothing is ever one hundred percent, and no outcome is guaranteed. As such, this audience will greatly appreciate how uncertainty can be captured and conveyed by mathematical models. For example, a simulation study on human performance results does not guarantee that one program is better, but the results can inform decision-makers that some option is better 70% of the time and will cost some amount of some resources or create some amount of risk exposure. Quantifying those “somes” into “sums” is a core opportunity of mathematical psychology for military applications. 
                         
                         
                            6. 
                            
                               
                                  There is no one right way to present the data. 
                               
                            
                            Different measurement approaches may benefit different scenarios, and the same fundamental task (e.g., marksmanship) will likely have striking disparities in how it should be presented under different circumstances. This variation complicates interpretations, but it also provides opportunities. Ambitious mathematical psychologists can develop novel techniques to help better address these questions. The point is that the researchers must be both flexible in presenting analytics based on the target audience and innovative in finding new solutions to handle data challenges. 
                         
                         
                            7. 
                            
                               
                                  Being clear is arguably the most important component of your presentation. 
                               
                            
                            Be brief, be brilliant, be gone. You could have the most stunning breakthrough in a generation, yet if it is not clearly presented, the translational value will be diminished or lost entirely. Trust that your audience is intelligent enough to understand what they are presented, but do them the courtesy of making your presentation as clear as possible. This point should emphasize brevity out of further respect for their time. As a practical piece of advice, develop an elevator pitch to describe your project—an abstract of an abstract to succinctly summarize things. Even if there is additional nuance to the results, as there assuredly will be, the people who will defend implementing or funding your project higher up the chain may only get a few sentences to mount that defense. Help them by providing such a concise summary or highlights. Alternatively, your findings might be applied by non-experts. There is a point where red-yellow-green caution levels become more valuable than detailed scientific nuance for perceptual differences in light of different wavelengths. 
                         
                         
                            8. 
                            
                               
                                  Quantify. Quantify. Quantify. 
                               
                            
                            Interesting is not enough. Your results will be better received as you can better quantify the impact of the results on operations. Think of the outcome in terms of return on investment, or ROI. What is the practical value of what you suggest, and how is it more valuable than what we do now? If you can provide this quantification, it will be easier to convey your impact higher and higher up the chain of command. Program managers and leadership must quantify the results of their investment in you—help them in return by making that quantification easier. 
                         
                         
                            9. 
                            
                               
                                  Impact—Demonstrate both cause and effect. 
                               
                            
                            The ideal metrics convey both the scope of some given action and what impact that action had on military servicemembers. Impact matters. Researchers should strive for metrics that describe both the action undertaken and how this activity benefited military operations. For example, military personnel may undergo several thousand hours of cumulative training through some cognitive enhancement platform, which demonstrates good utilization of that platform, but how does this enhancement impact military operations? The best data analyses will demonstrate impact—both cause and effect. 
                         
                         
                            10. 
                            
                               
                                  Mathematical psychology and modeling techniques are the future of military research. 
                               
                            
                            Few organizations appreciate data as much as military organizations. Major funding programs require solid foundations to justify major investments into research, which modeling and simulation techniques can provide to help support senior military decision-makers. Moreover, simulations might be the only option in some cases. There are many military examples involving lethal force where human subjects data cannot be collected due to safety concerns, which makes modeling and simulation the best possible path forward. Answering questions where data collection is not possible might present a new direction for mathematical psychology as well as new opportunities to support military research. Existing data also produces better decisions when the right statistical and modeling techniques are applied.

Bottom Line Up Front (BLUF)

Senior military personnel are likely to be exceptionally busy people. You may not have time to motivate methods and explain all details behind a decision. Many situations will call for presenting a single-sentence result or recommendation with supporting material made available afterward or elsewhere. A common military idiom is the BLUF, or Bottom Line Up Front. The first sentence of an e-mail or presentation gives the conclusion or purpose right away, and as the details become more complicated, the BLUF becomes more important. Be able and willing to present the bottom line or key takeaway as the very first thing when presenting to a military audience.

Understand the target audience and how the research will be used.

Your research is being done for a purpose. Even if the goal is to invent a completely new process or procedure, there is a decision to be made or a process to be replaced. Researchers may need to adjust a communication strategy to involve more theory versus pure application when speaking to a program manager versus an end user. The research outcome will also benefit from your better understanding of how the research will be used. Military decision-makers love using data-based approaches because data further quantifies and justifies their own decision-making process when their superiors inevitably ask why. Program managers are not the end of the chain—there is always a bigger fish.

Understand that some decision must be made.

Many conclusions come with the caveat that “more research is needed”. The statement is a truism, but in a military context, the phrase is especially useless. Some decision is going to be made from military research. Missions are planned on the premise of operational risk management, not risk avoidance. Even if there are lingering questions, some action needs to be taken, and actionable outcomes from the research are more valuable to the military than publishing in a high impact journal. Present your findings in a way that will best supplement the decision to be made or the action to be taken.

Provide the information to make a decision—do not make a decision for them.

There is a fine line to walk when presenting data or conducting research. Data and evidence should be presented in an unbiased way, and while concise statements or recommendations are important, the goal should be to provide context and information to key decision-makers without attempting to make the decision. Often, there are performance/cost trade-offs, and the goal is to present the contrast in terms that can be readily understood. Different military units will place different importance on different aspects, and if you try to make the decision on their behalf, you may inadvertently assign priorities differently than its members would. The goal should be to quantify risk, benefit, and uncertainty that support decision-making.

Risk mitigation is a core aspect of military decisions—and a core opportunity to quantify uncertainty with mathematical models!

Military decision-makers will understand that nothing is ever one hundred percent, and no outcome is guaranteed. As such, this audience will greatly appreciate how uncertainty can be captured and conveyed by mathematical models. For example, a simulation study on human performance results does not guarantee that one program is better, but the results can inform decision-makers that some option is better 70% of the time and will cost some amount of some resources or create some amount of risk exposure. Quantifying those “somes” into “sums” is a core opportunity of mathematical psychology for military applications.

There is no one right way to present the data.

Different measurement approaches may benefit different scenarios, and the same fundamental task (e.g., marksmanship) will likely have striking disparities in how it should be presented under different circumstances. This variation complicates interpretations, but it also provides opportunities. Ambitious mathematical psychologists can develop novel techniques to help better address these questions. The point is that the researchers must be both flexible in presenting analytics based on the target audience and innovative in finding new solutions to handle data challenges.

Being clear is arguably the most important component of your presentation.

Be brief, be brilliant, be gone. You could have the most stunning breakthrough in a generation, yet if it is not clearly presented, the translational value will be diminished or lost entirely. Trust that your audience is intelligent enough to understand what they are presented, but do them the courtesy of making your presentation as clear as possible. This point should emphasize brevity out of further respect for their time. As a practical piece of advice, develop an elevator pitch to describe your project—an abstract of an abstract to succinctly summarize things. Even if there is additional nuance to the results, as there assuredly will be, the people who will defend implementing or funding your project higher up the chain may only get a few sentences to mount that defense. Help them by providing such a concise summary or highlights. Alternatively, your findings might be applied by non-experts. There is a point where red-yellow-green caution levels become more valuable than detailed scientific nuance for perceptual differences in light of different wavelengths.

Quantify. Quantify. Quantify.

Interesting is not enough. Your results will be better received as you can better quantify the impact of the results on operations. Think of the outcome in terms of return on investment, or ROI. What is the practical value of what you suggest, and how is it more valuable than what we do now? If you can provide this quantification, it will be easier to convey your impact higher and higher up the chain of command. Program managers and leadership must quantify the results of their investment in you—help them in return by making that quantification easier.

Impact—Demonstrate both cause and effect.

The ideal metrics convey both the scope of some given action and what impact that action had on military servicemembers. Impact matters. Researchers should strive for metrics that describe both the action undertaken and how this activity benefited military operations. For example, military personnel may undergo several thousand hours of cumulative training through some cognitive enhancement platform, which demonstrates good utilization of that platform, but how does this enhancement impact military operations? The best data analyses will demonstrate impact—both cause and effect.

Mathematical psychology and modeling techniques are the future of military research.

Few organizations appreciate data as much as military organizations. Major funding programs require solid foundations to justify major investments into research, which modeling and simulation techniques can provide to help support senior military decision-makers. Moreover, simulations might be the only option in some cases. There are many military examples involving lethal force where human subjects data cannot be collected due to safety concerns, which makes modeling and simulation the best possible path forward. Answering questions where data collection is not possible might present a new direction for mathematical psychology as well as new opportunities to support military research. Existing data also produces better decisions when the right statistical and modeling techniques are applied.

In closing, I will offer some anecdotes from my personal experience to supplement the points made here. Unfortunately, everyone who approaches me about military research seems to have  the  solution to our challenges. Hyperbole becomes common during discussion as proposed research often feels uncomfortably similar to high-pressure sales pitches. However, not everything needs to change the world. New initiatives could make operators more effective, medical procedures less invasive, or logistical challenges more efficient. Too many people try to sell high class sports cars or expensive wines when your primary need might be a breakfast cereal the kids will eat. If you do not understand what the Service needs, then your proposal could either go to the wrong place or fail to address the needs of the servicemembers it is intended to support.

Moreover, consider the other side of this particular coin. A program manager is not the end-user or final decision node in this process. People do not regularly consider how the proposal must be defended internally or the true value of concise statements. Even if the program manager agrees to fund a project, transition partners must likewise provide their support. I need to understand the project, but I need a concise summary—an abstract of an abstract. In a room of high-ranking military officials, your opportunity to speak may be limited to only a few sentences. Your point must be concise and clear. An adage drilled into me by a mentor embodied this point:  be brief, be brilliant, be gone . If I tell a researcher that we are expecting effect sizes of Cohen’s  
                         
                            d 
                            = 
                            5 
                            . 
                            0 
                         
                       or greater, you might immediately understand the shockingly large effect. If I tell an admiral that same thing, I might have to explain what that effect size means or even who Cohen is. I have then wasted one or all of the three sentences I have. What I need most is a way to convey the project importance without also needing to explain why what I just said is important. If the sentence does not explain itself without further support, it is of little use to me. If the explanation is rapidly understood or sufficiently intriguing, the admiral will ask more questions and I might have more sentences to explain.

Here is where mathematical psychology can help translational military research. Military officials appreciate data as much as anyone on this planet. Their decisions will be reviewed and they in turn will have to quantify their own efforts and achievements during a military tour. Project accomplishments are easier to convey if “this project will enhance combat readiness” becomes “this project will increase combat effectiveness by 23% and reduce casualties by 42%”. If high-ranking decision-makers want more information, they will request it, and someone like me will be assigned to prepare a brief. Even simple tools can help convey the necessary information in a clear and concise manner. Monte Carlo is one such simple tool, and probably far less complex than the methods many readers of this journal already know. The same process could be applied to military medicine, physical training, equipment evaluation, logistical support, and a myriad of other techniques. To gain further support, I need ways to convey information that will immediately garner appreciation for the proposed changes, and I need those methods to be as quantifiable and concise as possible. Think about these concepts when designing your studies or proposals. Both you and your military partners will find better success if you do.

I am a military service member or employee of the U.S. Government. This work was prepared as part of my official duties. Title 17, U.S.C. Section 105 provides that copyright protection under this title is not available for any work of the U.S. Government. Title 17, U.S.C. Section 101 defines a U.S. Government work as work prepared by a military service member or employee of the U.S. Government as part of that person’s official duties. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of Defense, nor the U.S. Government.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.